1:1 in the beginning god created the heaven and the earth.

1:2 and the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon
the face of the deep. and the spirit of god moved upon the face of the
waters.

1:3 and god said, let there be light: and there was light.

1:4 and god saw the light, that it was good: and god divided the light
from the darkness.

1:5 and god called the light day, and the darkness he called night.
and the evening and the morning were the first day.

1:6 and god said, let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it divide the waters from the waters.

1:7 and god made the firmament, and divided the waters which were
under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament:
and it was so.

1:8 and god called the firmament heaven. and the evening and the
morning were the second day.

1:9 and god said, let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.

1:10 and god called the dry land earth; and the gathering together of
the waters called he seas: and god saw that it was good.

1:11 and god said, let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is
in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

1:12 and the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after
his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after
his kind: and god saw that it was good.

1:13 and the evening and the morning were the third day.

1:14 and god said, let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven
to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and years: 1:15 and let them be for lights in
the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was
so.

1:16 and god made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.

1:17 and god set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, 1:18 and to rule over the day and over the night, and
to divide the light from the darkness: and god saw that it was good.

1:19 and the evening and the morning were the fourth day.

1:20 and god said, let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven.

1:21 and god created great whales, and every living creature that
moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind,
and every winged fowl after his kind: and god saw that it was good.

1:22 and god blessed them, saying, be fruitful, and multiply, and fill
the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

1:23 and the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

1:24 and god said, let the earth bring forth the living creature after
his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his
kind: and it was so.

1:25 and god made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle
after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after
his kind: and god saw that it was good.

1:26 and god said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness:
and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl
of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

1:27 so god created man in his own image, in the image of god created
he him; male and female created he them.

1:28 and god blessed them, and god said unto them, be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth.

1:29 and god said, behold, i have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which
is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.

1:30 and to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air,
and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is
life, i have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.

1:31 and god saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was
very good. and the evening and the morning were the sixth day.

2:1 thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of
them.

2:2 and on the seventh day god ended his work which he had made; and
he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.

2:3 and god blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that
in it he had rested from all his work which god created and made.

2:4 these are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when
they were created, in the day that the lord god made the earth and the
heavens, 2:5 and every plant of the field before it was in the earth,
and every herb of the field before it grew: for the lord god had not
caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the
ground.

2:6 but there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole
face of the ground.

2:7 and the lord god formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living
soul.

2:8 and the lord god planted a garden eastward in eden; and there he
put the man whom he had formed.

2:9 and out of the ground made the lord god to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the
midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

2:10 and a river went out of eden to water the garden; and from thence
it was parted, and became into four heads.

2:11 the name of the first is pison: that is it which compasseth the
whole land of havilah, where there is gold; 2:12 and the gold of that
land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

2:13 and the name of the second river is gihon: the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of ethiopia.

2:14 and the name of the third river is hiddekel: that is it which
goeth toward the east of assyria. and the fourth river is euphrates.

2:15 and the lord god took the man, and put him into the garden of
eden to dress it and to keep it.

2:16 and the lord god commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the
garden thou mayest freely eat: 2:17 but of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

2:18 and the lord god said, it is not good that the man should be
alone; i will make him an help meet for him.

2:19 and out of the ground the lord god formed every beast of the
field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto adam to see
what he would call them: and whatsoever adam called every living
creature, that was the name thereof.

2:20 and adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air,
and to every beast of the field; but for adam there was not found an
help meet for him.

2:21 and the lord god caused a deep sleep to fall upon adam, and he
slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead
thereof; 2:22 and the rib, which the lord god had taken from man, made
he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

2:23 and adam said, this is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh: she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man.

2:24 therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.

2:25 and they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed.

3:1 now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which
the lord god had made. and he said unto the woman, yea, hath god said,
ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?  3:2 and the woman said
unto the serpent, we may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
3:3 but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden,
god hath said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye die.

3:4 and the serpent said unto the woman, ye shall not surely die: 3:5
for god doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall
be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

3:6 and when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that
it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one
wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto
her husband with her; and he did eat.

3:7 and the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they
were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves
aprons.

3:8 and they heard the voice of the lord god walking in the garden in
the cool of the day: and adam and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the lord god amongst the trees of the garden.

3:9 and the lord god called unto adam, and said unto him, where art
thou?  3:10 and he said, i heard thy voice in the garden, and i was
afraid, because i was naked; and i hid myself.

3:11 and he said, who told thee that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten
of the tree, whereof i commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
3:12 and the man said, the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she
gave me of the tree, and i did eat.

3:13 and the lord god said unto the woman, what is this that thou hast
done? and the woman said, the serpent beguiled me, and i did eat.

3:14 and the lord god said unto the serpent, because thou hast done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the
field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the
days of thy life: 3:15 and i will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head,
and thou shalt bruise his heel.

3:16 unto the woman he said, i will greatly multiply thy sorrow and
thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy
desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

3:17 and unto adam he said, because thou hast hearkened unto the voice
of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which i commanded thee,
saying, thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake;
in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; 3:18 thorns
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field; 3:19 in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for
dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.

3:20 and adam called his wife's name eve; because she was the mother
of all living.

3:21 unto adam also and to his wife did the lord god make coats of
skins, and clothed them.

3:22 and the lord god said, behold, the man is become as one of us, to
know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also
of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: 3:23 therefore the
lord god sent him forth from the garden of eden, to till the ground
from whence he was taken.

3:24 so he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden
of eden cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep
the way of the tree of life.

4:1 and adam knew eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare cain, and
said, i have gotten a man from the lord.

4:2 and she again bare his brother abel. and abel was a keeper of
sheep, but cain was a tiller of the ground.

4:3 and in process of time it came to pass, that cain brought of the
fruit of the ground an offering unto the lord.

4:4 and abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of
the fat thereof. and the lord had respect unto abel and to his
offering: 4:5 but unto cain and to his offering he had not respect.
and cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.

4:6 and the lord said unto cain, why art thou wroth? and why is thy
countenance fallen?  4:7 if thou doest well, shalt thou not be
accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. and unto
thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.

4:8 and cain talked with abel his brother: and it came to pass, when
they were in the field, that cain rose up against abel his brother,
and slew him.

4:9 and the lord said unto cain, where is abel thy brother? and he
said, i know not: am i my brother's keeper?  4:10 and he said, what
hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from
the ground.

4:11 and now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her
mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand; 4:12 when thou
tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her
strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

4:13 and cain said unto the lord, my punishment is greater than i can
bear.

4:14 behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the
earth; and from thy face shall i be hid; and i shall be a fugitive and
a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one
that findeth me shall slay me.

4:15 and the lord said unto him, therefore whosoever slayeth cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. and the lord set a mark
upon cain, lest any finding him should kill him.

4:16 and cain went out from the presence of the lord, and dwelt in the
land of nod, on the east of eden.

4:17 and cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare enoch: and he
builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his
son, enoch.

4:18 and unto enoch was born irad: and irad begat mehujael: and
mehujael begat methusael: and methusael begat lamech.

4:19 and lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was adah,
and the name of the other zillah.

4:20 and adah bare jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents,
and of such as have cattle.

4:21 and his brother's name was jubal: he was the father of all such
as handle the harp and organ.

4:22 and zillah, she also bare tubalcain, an instructer of every
artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of tubalcain was naamah.

4:23 and lamech said unto his wives, adah and zillah, hear my voice;
ye wives of lamech, hearken unto my speech: for i have slain a man to
my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

4:24 if cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly lamech seventy and
sevenfold.

4:25 and adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his
name seth: for god, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead
of abel, whom cain slew.

4:26 and to seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his
name enos: then began men to call upon the name of the lord.

5:1 this is the book of the generations of adam. in the day that god
created man, in the likeness of god made he him; 5:2 male and female
created he them; and blessed them, and called their name adam, in the
day when they were created.

5:3 and adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his
own likeness, and after his image; and called his name seth: 5:4 and
the days of adam after he had begotten seth were eight hundred years:
and he begat sons and daughters: 5:5 and all the days that adam lived
were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.

5:6 and seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat enos: 5:7 and
seth lived after he begat enos eight hundred and seven years, and
begat sons and daughters: 5:8 and all the days of seth were nine
hundred and twelve years: and he died.

5:9 and enos lived ninety years, and begat cainan: 5:10 and enos lived
after he begat cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons
and daughters: 5:11 and all the days of enos were nine hundred and
five years: and he died.

5:12 and cainan lived seventy years and begat mahalaleel: 5:13 and
cainan lived after he begat mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years,
and begat sons and daughters: 5:14 and all the days of cainan were
nine hundred and ten years: and he died.

5:15 and mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat jared: 5:16
and mahalaleel lived after he begat jared eight hundred and thirty
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:17 and all the days of
mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

5:18 and jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat
enoch: 5:19 and jared lived after he begat enoch eight hundred years,
and begat sons and daughters: 5:20 and all the days of jared were nine
hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

5:21 and enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat methuselah: 5:22
and enoch walked with god after he begat methuselah three hundred
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:23 and all the days of enoch
were three hundred sixty and five years: 5:24 and enoch walked with
god: and he was not; for god took him.

5:25 and methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat
lamech.

5:26 and methuselah lived after he begat lamech seven hundred eighty
and two years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:27 and all the days of
methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

5:28 and lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a
son: 5:29 and he called his name noah, saying, this same shall comfort
us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground
which the lord hath cursed.

5:30 and lamech lived after he begat noah five hundred ninety and five
years, and begat sons and daughters: 5:31 and all the days of lamech
were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.

5:32 and noah was five hundred years old: and noah begat shem, ham,
and japheth.

6:1 and it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the
earth, and daughters were born unto them, 6:2 that the sons of god saw
the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
all which they chose.

6:3 and the lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years.

6:4 there were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that,
when the sons of god came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare
children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of
renown.

6:5 and god saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually.

6:6 and it repented the lord that he had made man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart.

6:7 and the lord said, i will destroy man whom i have created from the
face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and
the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that i have made them.

6:8 but noah found grace in the eyes of the lord.

6:9 these are the generations of noah: noah was a just man and perfect
in his generations, and noah walked with god.

6:10 and noah begat three sons, shem, ham, and japheth.

6:11 the earth also was corrupt before god, and the earth was filled
with violence.

6:12 and god looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.

6:13 and god said unto noah, the end of all flesh is come before me;
for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, i
will destroy them with the earth.

6:14 make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.

6:15 and this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: the length
of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty
cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

6:16 a window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou
finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side
thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.

6:17 and, behold, i, even i, do bring a flood of waters upon the
earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under
heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die.

6:18 but with thee will i establish my covenant; and thou shalt come
into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives
with thee.

6:19 and of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt
thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be
male and female.

6:20 of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of
every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort
shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.

6:21 and take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt
gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.

6:22 thus did noah; according to all that god commanded him, so did
he.

7:1 and the lord said unto noah, come thou and all thy house into the
ark; for thee have i seen righteous before me in this generation.

7:2 of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male
and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and
his female.

7:3 of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to
keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.

7:4 for yet seven days, and i will cause it to rain upon the earth
forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that i have
made will i destroy from off the face of the earth.

7:5 and noah did according unto all that the lord commanded him.

7:6 and noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was
upon the earth.

7:7 and noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.

7:8 of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls,
and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, 7:9 there went in two
and two unto noah into the ark, the male and the female, as god had
commanded noah.

7:10 and it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the
flood were upon the earth.

7:11 in the six hundredth year of noah's life, in the second month,
the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains
of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.

7:12 and the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.

7:13 in the selfsame day entered noah, and shem, and ham, and japheth,
the sons of noah, and noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons
with them, into the ark; 7:14 they, and every beast after his kind,
and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind,
every bird of every sort.

7:15 and they went in unto noah into the ark, two and two of all
flesh, wherein is the breath of life.

7:16 and they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
god had commanded him: and the lord shut him in.

7:17 and the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters
increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.

7:18 and the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the
earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.

7:19 and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the
high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.

7:20 fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains
were covered.

7:21 and all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and
of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth, and every man: 7:22 all in whose nostrils was the
breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.

7:23 and every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face
of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the
fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and noah
only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.

7:24 and the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days.

8:1 and god remembered noah, and every living thing, and all the
cattle that was with him in the ark: and god made a wind to pass over
the earth, and the waters asswaged; 8:2 the fountains also of the deep
and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was
restrained; 8:3 and the waters returned from off the earth
continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the
waters were abated.

8:4 and the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
the month, upon the mountains of ararat.

8:5 and the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the
tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the
mountains seen.

8:6 and it came to pass at the end of forty days, that noah opened the
window of the ark which he had made: 8:7 and he sent forth a raven,
which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off
the earth.

8:8 also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were
abated from off the face of the ground; 8:9 but the dove found no rest
for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for
the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his
hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.

8:10 and he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the
dove out of the ark; 8:11 and the dove came in to him in the evening;
and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so noah knew that
the waters were abated from off the earth.

8:12 and he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove;
which returned not again unto him any more.

8:13 and it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the
first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from
off the earth: and noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked,
and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.

8:14 and in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month, was the earth dried.

8:15 and god spake unto noah, saying, 8:16 go forth of the ark, thou,
and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.

8:17 bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of
all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the
earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.

8:18 and noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with him: 8:19 every beast, every creeping thing, and every
fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went
forth out of the ark.

8:20 and noah builded an altar unto the lord; and took of every clean
beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the
altar.

8:21 and the lord smelled a sweet savour; and the lord said in his
heart, i will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for
the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither will i
again smite any more every thing living, as i have done.

8:22 while the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

9:1 and god blessed noah and his sons, and said unto them, be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.

9:2 and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast
of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth
upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are
they delivered.

9:3 every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
green herb have i given you all things.

9:4 but flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall
ye not eat.

9:5 and surely your blood of your lives will i require; at the hand of
every beast will i require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of
every man's brother will i require the life of man.

9:6 whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in
the image of god made he man.

9:7 and you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in
the earth, and multiply therein.

9:8 and god spake unto noah, and to his sons with him, saying, 9:9 and
i, behold, i establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after
you; 9:10 and with every living creature that is with you, of the
fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from
all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.

9:11 and i will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall
there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.

9:12 and god said, this is the token of the covenant which i make
between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for
perpetual generations: 9:13 i do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall
be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.

9:14 and it shall come to pass, when i bring a cloud over the earth,
that the bow shall be seen in the cloud: 9:15 and i will remember my
covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all
flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all
flesh.

9:16 and the bow shall be in the cloud; and i will look upon it, that
i may remember the everlasting covenant between god and every living
creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:17 and god said unto noah, this is the token of the covenant, which
i have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.

9:18 and the sons of noah, that went forth of the ark, were shem, and
ham, and japheth: and ham is the father of canaan.

9:19 these are the three sons of noah: and of them was the whole earth
overspread.

9:20 and noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
9:21 and he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered
within his tent.

9:22 and ham, the father of canaan, saw the nakedness of his father,
and told his two brethren without.

9:23 and shem and japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their
shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's
nakedness.

9:24 and noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had
done unto him.

9:25 and he said, cursed be canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren.

9:26 and he said, blessed be the lord god of shem; and canaan shall be
his servant.

9:27 god shall enlarge japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of
shem; and canaan shall be his servant.

9:28 and noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.

9:29 and all the days of noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and
he died.

10:1 now these are the generations of the sons of noah, shem, ham, and
japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.

10:2 the sons of japheth; gomer, and magog, and madai, and javan, and
tubal, and meshech, and tiras.

10:3 and the sons of gomer; ashkenaz, and riphath, and togarmah.

10:4 and the sons of javan; elishah, and tarshish, kittim, and
dodanim.

10:5 by these were the isles of the gentiles divided in their lands;
every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.

10:6 and the sons of ham; cush, and mizraim, and phut, and canaan.

10:7 and the sons of cush; seba, and havilah, and sabtah, and raamah,
and sabtechah: and the sons of raamah; sheba, and dedan.

10:8 and cush begat nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.

10:9 he was a mighty hunter before the lord: wherefore it is said,
even as nimrod the mighty hunter before the lord.

10:10 and the beginning of his kingdom was babel, and erech, and
accad, and calneh, in the land of shinar.

10:11 out of that land went forth asshur, and builded nineveh, and the
city rehoboth, and calah, 10:12 and resen between nineveh and calah:
the same is a great city.

10:13 and mizraim begat ludim, and anamim, and lehabim, and naphtuhim,
10:14 and pathrusim, and casluhim, (out of whom came philistim,) and
caphtorim.

10:15 and canaan begat sidon his first born, and heth, 10:16 and the
jebusite, and the amorite, and the girgasite, 10:17 and the hivite,
and the arkite, and the sinite, 10:18 and the arvadite, and the
zemarite, and the hamathite: and afterward were the families of the
canaanites spread abroad.

10:19 and the border of the canaanites was from sidon, as thou comest
to gerar, unto gaza; as thou goest, unto sodom, and gomorrah, and
admah, and zeboim, even unto lasha.

10:20 these are the sons of ham, after their families, after their
tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.

10:21 unto shem also, the father of all the children of eber, the
brother of japheth the elder, even to him were children born.

10:22 the children of shem; elam, and asshur, and arphaxad, and lud,
and aram.

10:23 and the children of aram; uz, and hul, and gether, and mash.

10:24 and arphaxad begat salah; and salah begat eber.

10:25 and unto eber were born two sons: the name of one was peleg; for
in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was joktan.

10:26 and joktan begat almodad, and sheleph, and hazarmaveth, and
jerah, 10:27 and hadoram, and uzal, and diklah, 10:28 and obal, and
abimael, and sheba, 10:29 and ophir, and havilah, and jobab: all these
were the sons of joktan.

10:30 and their dwelling was from mesha, as thou goest unto sephar a
mount of the east.

10:31 these are the sons of shem, after their families, after their
tongues, in their lands, after their nations.

10:32 these are the families of the sons of noah, after their
generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided
in the earth after the flood.

11:1 and the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

11:2 and it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they
found a plain in the land of shinar; and they dwelt there.

11:3 and they said one to another, go to, let us make brick, and burn
them thoroughly. and they had brick for stone, and slime had they for
morter.

11:4 and they said, go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose
top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be
scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.

11:5 and the lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the
children of men builded.

11:6 and the lord said, behold, the people is one, and they have all
one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be
restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.

11:7 go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that
they may not understand one another's speech.

11:8 so the lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of
all the earth: and they left off to build the city.

11:9 therefore is the name of it called babel; because the lord did
there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the
lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

11:10 these are the generations of shem: shem was an hundred years
old, and begat arphaxad two years after the flood: 11:11 and shem
lived after he begat arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and
daughters.

11:12 and arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat salah: 11:13
and arphaxad lived after he begat salah four hundred and three years,
and begat sons and daughters.

11:14 and salah lived thirty years, and begat eber: 11:15 and salah
lived after he begat eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons
and daughters.

11:16 and eber lived four and thirty years, and begat peleg: 11:17 and
eber lived after he begat peleg four hundred and thirty years, and
begat sons and daughters.

11:18 and peleg lived thirty years, and begat reu: 11:19 and peleg
lived after he begat reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons
and daughters.

11:20 and reu lived two and thirty years, and begat serug: 11:21 and
reu lived after he begat serug two hundred and seven years, and begat
sons and daughters.

11:22 and serug lived thirty years, and begat nahor: 11:23 and serug
lived after he begat nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and
daughters.

11:24 and nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat terah: 11:25
and nahor lived after he begat terah an hundred and nineteen years,
and begat sons and daughters.

11:26 and terah lived seventy years, and begat abram, nahor, and
haran.

11:27 now these are the generations of terah: terah begat abram,
nahor, and haran; and haran begat lot.

11:28 and haran died before his father terah in the land of his
nativity, in ur of the chaldees.

11:29 and abram and nahor took them wives: the name of abram's wife
was sarai; and the name of nahor's wife, milcah, the daughter of
haran, the father of milcah, and the father of iscah.

11:30 but sarai was barren; she had no child.

11:31 and terah took abram his son, and lot the son of haran his son's
son, and sarai his daughter in law, his son abram's wife; and they
went forth with them from ur of the chaldees, to go into the land of
canaan; and they came unto haran, and dwelt there.

11:32 and the days of terah were two hundred and five years: and terah
died in haran.

12:1 now the lord had said unto abram, get thee out of thy country,
and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that i
will shew thee: 12:2 and i will make of thee a great nation, and i
will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a
blessing: 12:3 and i will bless them that bless thee, and curse him
that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed.

12:4 so abram departed, as the lord had spoken unto him; and lot went
with him: and abram was seventy and five years old when he departed
out of haran.

12:5 and abram took sarai his wife, and lot his brother's son, and all
their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had
gotten in haran; and they went forth to go into the land of canaan;
and into the land of canaan they came.

12:6 and abram passed through the land unto the place of sichem, unto
the plain of moreh. and the canaanite was then in the land.

12:7 and the lord appeared unto abram, and said, unto thy seed will i
give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the lord, who
appeared unto him.

12:8 and he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of bethel,
and pitched his tent, having bethel on the west, and hai on the east:
and there he builded an altar unto the lord, and called upon the name
of the lord.

12:9 and abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.

12:10 and there was a famine in the land: and abram went down into
egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.

12:11 and it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into egypt,
that he said unto sarai his wife, behold now, i know that thou art a
fair woman to look upon: 12:12 therefore it shall come to pass, when
the egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, this is his wife:
and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.

12:13 say, i pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with
me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.

12:14 and it came to pass, that, when abram was come into egypt, the
egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.

12:15 the princes also of pharaoh saw her, and commended her before
pharaoh: and the woman was taken into pharaoh's house.

12:16 and he entreated abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and
oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses,
and camels.

12:17 and the lord plagued pharaoh and his house with great plagues
because of sarai abram's wife.

12:18 and pharaoh called abram and said, what is this that thou hast
done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?  12:19
why saidst thou, she is my sister? so i might have taken her to me to
wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.

12:20 and pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him
away, and his wife, and all that he had.

13:1 and abram went up out of egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he
had, and lot with him, into the south.

13:2 and abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.

13:3 and he went on his journeys from the south even to bethel, unto
the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between bethel and
hai; 13:4 unto the place of the altar, which he had make there at the
first: and there abram called on the name of the lord.

13:5 and lot also, which went with abram, had flocks, and herds, and
tents.

13:6 and the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell
together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell
together.

13:7 and there was a strife between the herdmen of abram's cattle and
the herdmen of lot's cattle: and the canaanite and the perizzite
dwelled then in the land.

13:8 and abram said unto lot, let there be no strife, i pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be
brethren.

13:9 is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, i pray thee,
from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then i will go to the right;
or if thou depart to the right hand, then i will go to the left.

13:10 and lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of jordan,
that it was well watered every where, before the lord destroyed sodom
and gomorrah, even as the garden of the lord, like the land of egypt,
as thou comest unto zoar.

13:11 then lot chose him all the plain of jordan; and lot journeyed
east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.

13:12 abram dwelled in the land of canaan, and lot dwelled in the
cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward sodom.

13:13 but the men of sodom were wicked and sinners before the lord
exceedingly.

13:14 and the lord said unto abram, after that lot was separated from
him, lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art
northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: 13:15 for all
the land which thou seest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed for
ever.

13:16 and i will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a
man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be
numbered.

13:17 arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the
breadth of it; for i will give it unto thee.

13:18 then abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of
mamre, which is in hebron, and built there an altar unto the lord.

14:1 and it came to pass in the days of amraphel king of shinar,
arioch king of ellasar, chedorlaomer king of elam, and tidal king of
nations; 14:2 that these made war with bera king of sodom, and with
birsha king of gomorrah, shinab king of admah, and shemeber king of
zeboiim, and the king of bela, which is zoar.

14:3 all these were joined together in the vale of siddim, which is
the salt sea.

14:4 twelve years they served chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year
they rebelled.

14:5 and in the fourteenth year came chedorlaomer, and the kings that
were with him, and smote the rephaims in ashteroth karnaim, and the
zuzims in ham, and the emins in shaveh kiriathaim, 14:6 and the
horites in their mount seir, unto elparan, which is by the wilderness.

14:7 and they returned, and came to enmishpat, which is kadesh, and
smote all the country of the amalekites, and also the amorites, that
dwelt in hazezontamar.

14:8 and there went out the king of sodom, and the king of gomorrah,
and the king of admah, and the king of zeboiim, and the king of bela
(the same is zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of
siddim; 14:9 with chedorlaomer the king of elam, and with tidal king
of nations, and amraphel king of shinar, and arioch king of ellasar;
four kings with five.

14:10 and the vale of siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of
sodom and gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled
to the mountain.

14:11 and they took all the goods of sodom and gomorrah, and all their
victuals, and went their way.

14:12 and they took lot, abram's brother's son, who dwelt in sodom,
and his goods, and departed.

14:13 and there came one that had escaped, and told abram the hebrew;
for he dwelt in the plain of mamre the amorite, brother of eshcol, and
brother of aner: and these were confederate with abram.

14:14 and when abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he
armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and
eighteen, and pursued them unto dan.

14:15 and he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by
night, and smote them, and pursued them unto hobah, which is on the
left hand of damascus.

14:16 and he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
brother lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

14:17 and the king of sodom went out to meet him after his return from
the slaughter of chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at
the valley of shaveh, which is the king's dale.

14:18 and melchizedek king of salem brought forth bread and wine: and
he was the priest of the most high god.

14:19 and he blessed him, and said, blessed be abram of the most high
god, possessor of heaven and earth: 14:20 and blessed be the most high
god, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. and he gave him
tithes of all.

14:21 and the king of sodom said unto abram, give me the persons, and
take the goods to thyself.

14:22 and abram said to the king of sodom, i have lift up mine hand
unto the lord, the most high god, the possessor of heaven and earth,
14:23 that i will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and
that i will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say,
i have made abram rich: 14:24 save only that which the young men have
eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, aner, eshcol,
and mamre; let them take their portion.

15:1 after these things the word of the lord came unto abram in a
vision, saying, fear not, abram: i am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward.

15:2 and abram said, lord god, what wilt thou give me, seeing i go
childless, and the steward of my house is this eliezer of damascus?
15:3 and abram said, behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo,
one born in my house is mine heir.

15:4 and, behold, the word of the lord came unto him, saying, this
shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own
bowels shall be thine heir.

15:5 and he brought him forth abroad, and said, look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he
said unto him, so shall thy seed be.

15:6 and he believed in the lord; and he counted it to him for
righteousness.

15:7 and he said unto him, i am the lord that brought thee out of ur
of the chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.

15:8 and he said, lord god, whereby shall i know that i shall inherit
it?  15:9 and he said unto him, take me an heifer of three years old,
and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a
turtledove, and a young pigeon.

15:10 and he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst,
and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.

15:11 and when the fowls came down upon the carcases, abram drove them
away.

15:12 and when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon abram;
and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.

15:13 and he said unto abram, know of a surety that thy seed shall be
a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shall serve them; and
they shall afflict them four hundred years; 15:14 and also that
nation, whom they shall serve, will i judge: and afterward shall they
come out with great substance.

15:15 and thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried
in a good old age.

15:16 but in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for
the iniquity of the amorites is not yet full.

15:17 and it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was
dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between
those pieces.

15:18 in the same day the lord made a covenant with abram, saying,
unto thy seed have i given this land, from the river of egypt unto the
great river, the river euphrates: 15:19 the kenites, and the
kenizzites, and the kadmonites, 15:20 and the hittites, and the
perizzites, and the rephaims, 15:21 and the amorites, and the
canaanites, and the girgashites, and the jebusites.

16:1 now sarai abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an
handmaid, an egyptian, whose name was hagar.

16:2 and sarai said unto abram, behold now, the lord hath restrained
me from bearing: i pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that i may
obtain children by her. and abram hearkened to the voice of sarai.

16:3 and sarai abram's wife took hagar her maid the egyptian, after
abram had dwelt ten years in the land of canaan, and gave her to her
husband abram to be his wife.

16:4 and he went in unto hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw
that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.

16:5 and sarai said unto abram, my wrong be upon thee: i have given my
maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, i was
despised in her eyes: the lord judge between me and thee.

16:6 but abram said unto sarai, behold, thy maid is in thine hand; do
to her as it pleaseth thee. and when sarai dealt hardly with her, she
fled from her face.

16:7 and the angel of the lord found her by a fountain of water in the
wilderness, by the fountain in the way to shur.

16:8 and he said, hagar, sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither
wilt thou go? and she said, i flee from the face of my mistress sarai.

16:9 and the angel of the lord said unto her, return to thy mistress,
and submit thyself under her hands.

16:10 and the angel of the lord said unto her, i will multiply thy
seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.

16:11 and the angel of the lord said unto her, behold, thou art with
child and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name ishmael; because
the lord hath heard thy affliction.

16:12 and he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man,
and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence
of all his brethren.

16:13 and she called the name of the lord that spake unto her, thou
god seest me: for she said, have i also here looked after him that
seeth me?  16:14 wherefore the well was called beerlahairoi; behold,
it is between kadesh and bered.

16:15 and hagar bare abram a son: and abram called his son's name,
which hagar bare, ishmael.

16:16 and abram was fourscore and six years old, when hagar bare
ishmael to abram.

17:1 and when abram was ninety years old and nine, the lord appeared
to abram, and said unto him, i am the almighty god; walk before me,
and be thou perfect.

17:2 and i will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly.

17:3 and abram fell on his face: and god talked with him, saying, 17:4
as for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a
father of many nations.

17:5 neither shall thy name any more be called abram, but thy name
shall be abraham; for a father of many nations have i made thee.

17:6 and i will make thee exceeding fruitful, and i will make nations
of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.

17:7 and i will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a
god unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

17:8 and i will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of canaan, for an
everlasting possession; and i will be their god.

17:9 and god said unto abraham, thou shalt keep my covenant therefore,
thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.

17:10 this is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and
thy seed after thee; every man child among you shall be circumcised.

17:11 and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall
be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.

17:12 and he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or
bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.

17:13 he that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy
money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your
flesh for an everlasting covenant.

17:14 and the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath
broken my covenant.

17:15 and god said unto abraham, as for sarai thy wife, thou shalt not
call her name sarai, but sarah shall her name be.

17:16 and i will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, i
will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people
shall be of her.

17:17 then abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?  17:18 and abraham
said unto god, o that ishmael might live before thee!  17:19 and god
said, sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call
his name isaac: and i will establish my covenant with him for an
everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

17:20 and as for ishmael, i have heard thee: behold, i have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly;
twelve princes shall he beget, and i will make him a great nation.

17:21 but my covenant will i establish with isaac, which sarah shall
bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.

17:22 and he left off talking with him, and god went up from abraham.

17:23 and abraham took ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the
men of abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in
the selfsame day, as god had said unto him.

17:24 and abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:25 and ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was
circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.

17:26 in the selfsame day was abraham circumcised, and ishmael his
son.

17:27 and all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with
money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.

18:1 and the lord appeared unto him in the plains of mamre: and he sat
in the tent door in the heat of the day; 18:2 and he lift up his eyes
and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he
ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the
ground, 18:3 and said, my lord, if now i have found favour in thy
sight, pass not away, i pray thee, from thy servant: 18:4 let a little
water, i pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves
under the tree: 18:5 and i will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort
ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come
to your servant. and they said, so do, as thou hast said.

18:6 and abraham hastened into the tent unto sarah, and said, make
ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes
upon the hearth.

18:7 and abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good,
and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.

18:8 and he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed,
and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they
did eat.

18:9 and they said unto him, where is sarah thy wife? and he said,
behold, in the tent.

18:10 and he said, i will certainly return unto thee according to the
time of life; and, lo, sarah thy wife shall have a son. and sarah
heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.

18:11 now abraham and sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it
ceased to be with sarah after the manner of women.

18:12 therefore sarah laughed within herself, saying, after i am waxed
old shall i have pleasure, my lord being old also?  18:13 and the lord
said unto abraham, wherefore did sarah laugh, saying, shall i of a
surety bear a child, which am old?  18:14 is any thing too hard for
the lord? at the time appointed i will return unto thee, according to
the time of life, and sarah shall have a son.

18:15 then sarah denied, saying, i laughed not; for she was afraid.
and he said, nay; but thou didst laugh.

18:16 and the men rose up from thence, and looked toward sodom: and
abraham went with them to bring them on the way.

18:17 and the lord said, shall i hide from abraham that thing which i
do; 18:18 seeing that abraham shall surely become a great and mighty
nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
18:19 for i know him, that he will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the lord, to do
justice and judgment; that the lord may bring upon abraham that which
he hath spoken of him.

18:20 and the lord said, because the cry of sodom and gomorrah is
great, and because their sin is very grievous; 18:21 i will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of
it, which is come unto me; and if not, i will know.

18:22 and the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward
sodom: but abraham stood yet before the lord.

18:23 and abraham drew near, and said, wilt thou also destroy the
righteous with the wicked?  18:24 peradventure there be fifty
righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the
place for the fifty righteous that are therein?  18:25 that be far
from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far
from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right?  18:26 and
the lord said, if i find in sodom fifty righteous within the city,
then i will spare all the place for their sakes.

18:27 and abraham answered and said, behold now, i have taken upon me
to speak unto the lord, which am but dust and ashes: 18:28
peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou
destroy all the city for lack of five? and he said, if i find there
forty and five, i will not destroy it.

18:29 and he spake unto him yet again, and said, peradventure there
shall be forty found there. and he said, i will not do it for forty's
sake.

18:30 and he said unto him, oh let not the lord be angry, and i will
speak: peradventure there shall thirty be found there. and he said, i
will not do it, if i find thirty there.

18:31 and he said, behold now, i have taken upon me to speak unto the
lord: peradventure there shall be twenty found there. and he said, i
will not destroy it for twenty's sake.

18:32 and he said, oh let not the lord be angry, and i will speak yet
but this once: peradventure ten shall be found there. and he said, i
will not destroy it for ten's sake.

18:33 and the lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with
abraham: and abraham returned unto his place.

19:1 and there came two angels to sodom at even; and lot sat in the
gate of sodom: and lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed
himself with his face toward the ground; 19:2 and he said, behold now,
my lords, turn in, i pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry
all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on
your ways. and they said, nay; but we will abide in the street all
night.

19:3 and he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him,
and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake
unleavened bread, and they did eat.

19:4 but before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of
sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people
from every quarter: 19:5 and they called unto lot, and said unto him,
where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out
unto us, that we may know them.

19:6 and lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after
him, 19:7 and said, i pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.

19:8 behold now, i have two daughters which have not known man; let
me, i pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good
in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they
under the shadow of my roof.

19:9 and they said, stand back. and they said again, this one fellow
came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal
worse with thee, than with them. and they pressed sore upon the man,
even lot, and came near to break the door.

19:10 but the men put forth their hand, and pulled lot into the house
to them, and shut to the door.

19:11 and they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to
find the door.

19:12 and the men said unto lot, hast thou here any besides? son in
law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the
city, bring them out of this place: 19:13 for we will destroy this
place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the
lord; and the lord hath sent us to destroy it.

19:14 and lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married
his daughters, and said, up, get you out of this place; for the lord
will destroy this city. but he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons
in law.

19:15 and when the morning arose, then the angels hastened lot,
saying, arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here;
lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.

19:16 and while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon
the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the lord
being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him
without the city.

19:17 and it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad,
that he said, escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay
thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

19:18 and lot said unto them, oh, not so, my lord: 19:19 behold now,
thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy
mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and i cannot
escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and i die: 19:20
behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one:
oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall
live.

19:21 and he said unto him, see, i have accepted thee concerning this
thing also, that i will not overthrow this city, for the which thou
hast spoken.

19:22 haste thee, escape thither; for i cannot do anything till thou
be come thither. therefore the name of the city was called zoar.

19:23 the sun was risen upon the earth when lot entered into zoar.

19:24 then the lord rained upon sodom and upon gomorrah brimstone and
fire from the lord out of heaven; 19:25 and he overthrew those cities,
and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that
which grew upon the ground.

19:26 but his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a
pillar of salt.

19:27 and abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he
stood before the lord: 19:28 and he looked toward sodom and gomorrah,
and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke
of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

19:29 and it came to pass, when god destroyed the cities of the plain,
that god remembered abraham, and sent lot out of the midst of the
overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which lot dwelt.

19:30 and lot went up out of zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his
two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in zoar: and he dwelt
in a cave, he and his two daughters.

19:31 and the firstborn said unto the younger, our father is old, and
there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of
all the earth: 19:32 come, let us make our father drink wine, and we
will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.

19:33 and they made their father drink wine that night: and the
firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when
she lay down, nor when she arose.

19:34 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto
the younger, behold, i lay yesternight with my father: let us make him
drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we
may preserve seed of our father.

19:35 and they made their father drink wine that night also: and the
younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay
down, nor when she arose.

19:36 thus were both the daughters of lot with child by their father.

19:37 and the first born bare a son, and called his name moab: the
same is the father of the moabites unto this day.

19:38 and the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name
benammi: the same is the father of the children of ammon unto this
day.

20:1 and abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and
dwelled between kadesh and shur, and sojourned in gerar.

20:2 and abraham said of sarah his wife, she is my sister: and
abimelech king of gerar sent, and took sarah.

20:3 but god came to abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken;
for she is a man's wife.

20:4 but abimelech had not come near her: and he said, lord, wilt thou
slay also a righteous nation?  20:5 said he not unto me, she is my
sister? and she, even she herself said, he is my brother: in the
integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have i done this.

20:6 and god said unto him in a dream, yea, i know that thou didst
this in the integrity of thy heart; for i also withheld thee from
sinning against me: therefore suffered i thee not to touch her.

20:7 now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and
he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her
not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are
thine.

20:8 therefore abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his
servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were
sore afraid.

20:9 then abimelech called abraham, and said unto him, what hast thou
done unto us? and what have i offended thee, that thou hast brought on
me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that
ought not to be done.

20:10 and abimelech said unto abraham, what sawest thou, that thou
hast done this thing?  20:11 and abraham said, because i thought,
surely the fear of god is not in this place; and they will slay me for
my wife's sake.

20:12 and yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my
father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.

20:13 and it came to pass, when god caused me to wander from my
father's house, that i said unto her, this is thy kindness which thou
shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me,
he is my brother.

20:14 and abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
womenservants, and gave them unto abraham, and restored him sarah his
wife.

20:15 and abimelech said, behold, my land is before thee: dwell where
it pleaseth thee.

20:16 and unto sarah he said, behold, i have given thy brother a
thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the
eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was
reproved.

20:17 so abraham prayed unto god: and god healed abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.

20:18 for the lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
abimelech, because of sarah abraham's wife.

21:1 and the lord visited sarah as he had said, and the lord did unto
sarah as he had spoken.

21:2 for sarah conceived, and bare abraham a son in his old age, at
the set time of which god had spoken to him.

21:3 and abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him,
whom sarah bare to him, isaac.

21:4 and abraham circumcised his son isaac being eight days old, as
god had commanded him.

21:5 and abraham was an hundred years old, when his son isaac was born
unto him.

21:6 and sarah said, god hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear
will laugh with me.

21:7 and she said, who would have said unto abraham, that sarah should
have given children suck? for i have born him a son in his old age.

21:8 and the child grew, and was weaned: and abraham made a great
feast the same day that isaac was weaned.

21:9 and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian, which she had born
unto abraham, mocking.

21:10 wherefore she said unto abraham, cast out this bondwoman and her
son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even
with isaac.

21:11 and the thing was very grievous in abraham's sight because of
his son.

21:12 and god said unto abraham, let it not be grievous in thy sight
because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that sarah
hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in isaac shall thy
seed be called.

21:13 and also of the son of the bondwoman will i make a nation,
because he is thy seed.

21:14 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottle of water, and gave it unto hagar, putting it on her shoulder,
and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in
the wilderness of beersheba.

21:15 and the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child
under one of the shrubs.

21:16 and she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off,
as it were a bow shot: for she said, let me not see the death of the
child. and she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.

21:17 and god heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of god called
to hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, what aileth thee, hagar?
fear not; for god hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.

21:18 arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for i will
make him a great nation.

21:19 and god opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she
went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.

21:20 and god was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became an archer.

21:21 and he dwelt in the wilderness of paran: and his mother took him
a wife out of the land of egypt.

21:22 and it came to pass at that time, that abimelech and phichol the
chief captain of his host spake unto abraham, saying, god is with thee
in all that thou doest: 21:23 now therefore swear unto me here by god
that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my
son's son: but according to the kindness that i have done unto thee,
thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.

21:24 and abraham said, i will swear.

21:25 and abraham reproved abimelech because of a well of water, which
abimelech's servants had violently taken away.

21:26 and abimelech said, i wot not who hath done this thing; neither
didst thou tell me, neither yet heard i of it, but to day.

21:27 and abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto abimelech;
and both of them made a covenant.

21:28 and abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.

21:29 and abimelech said unto abraham, what mean these seven ewe lambs
which thou hast set by themselves?  21:30 and he said, for these seven
ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto
me, that i have digged this well.

21:31 wherefore he called that place beersheba; because there they
sware both of them.

21:32 thus they made a covenant at beersheba: then abimelech rose up,
and phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the
land of the philistines.

21:33 and abraham planted a grove in beersheba, and called there on
the name of the lord, the everlasting god.

21:34 and abraham sojourned in the philistines' land many days.

22:1 and it came to pass after these things, that god did tempt
abraham, and said unto him, abraham: and he said, behold, here i am.

22:2 and he said, take now thy son, thine only son isaac, whom thou
lovest, and get thee into the land of moriah; and offer him there for
a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which i will tell thee of.

22:3 and abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass,
and took two of his young men with him, and isaac his son, and clave
the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place
of which god had told him.

22:4 then on the third day abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the
place afar off.

22:5 and abraham said unto his young men, abide ye here with the ass;
and i and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

22:6 and abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they
went both of them together.

22:7 and isaac spake unto abraham his father, and said, my father: and
he said, here am i, my son. and he said, behold the fire and the wood:
but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?  22:8 and abraham said, my
son, god will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they
went both of them together.

22:9 and they came to the place which god had told him of; and abraham
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound isaac his
son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.

22:10 and abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay
his son.

22:11 and the angel of the lord called unto him out of heaven, and
said, abraham, abraham: and he said, here am i.

22:12 and he said, lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
any thing unto him: for now i know that thou fearest god, seeing thou
hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.

22:13 and abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind
him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and abraham went and took
the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his
son.

22:14 and abraham called the name of that place jehovahjireh: as it is
said to this day, in the mount of the lord it shall be seen.

22:15 and the angel of the lord called unto abraham out of heaven the
second time, 22:16 and said, by myself have i sworn, saith the lord,
for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son,
thine only son: 22:17 that in blessing i will bless thee, and in
multiplying i will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and
as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his enemies; 22:18 and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.

22:19 so abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and
went together to beersheba; and abraham dwelt at beersheba.

22:20 and it came to pass after these things, that it was told
abraham, saying, behold, milcah, she hath also born children unto thy
brother nahor; 22:21 huz his firstborn, and buz his brother, and
kemuel the father of aram, 22:22 and chesed, and hazo, and pildash,
and jidlaph, and bethuel.

22:23 and bethuel begat rebekah: these eight milcah did bear to nahor,
abraham's brother.

22:24 and his concubine, whose name was reumah, she bare also tebah,
and gaham, and thahash, and maachah.

23:1 and sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these
were the years of the life of sarah.

23:2 and sarah died in kirjatharba; the same is hebron in the land of
canaan: and abraham came to mourn for sarah, and to weep for her.

23:3 and abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the
sons of heth, saying, 23:4 i am a stranger and a sojourner with you:
give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that i may bury my
dead out of my sight.

23:5 and the children of heth answered abraham, saying unto him, 23:6
hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of
our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his
sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.

23:7 and abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the
land, even to the children of heth.

23:8 and he communed with them, saying, if it be your mind that i
should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to
ephron the son of zohar, 23:9 that he may give me the cave of
machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as
much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a
buryingplace amongst you.

23:10 and ephron dwelt among the children of heth: and ephron the
hittite answered abraham in the audience of the children of heth, even
of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying, 23:11 nay, my
lord, hear me: the field give i thee, and the cave that is therein, i
give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give i it thee:
bury thy dead.

23:12 and abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.

23:13 and he spake unto ephron in the audience of the people of the
land, saying, but if thou wilt give it, i pray thee, hear me: i will
give thee money for the field; take it of me, and i will bury my dead
there.

23:14 and ephron answered abraham, saying unto him, 23:15 my lord,
hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver;
what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.

23:16 and abraham hearkened unto ephron; and abraham weighed to ephron
the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of heth,
four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.

23:17 and the field of ephron which was in machpelah, which was before
mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees
that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were
made sure 23:18 unto abraham for a possession in the presence of the
children of heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.

23:19 and after this, abraham buried sarah his wife in the cave of the
field of machpelah before mamre: the same is hebron in the land of
canaan.

23:20 and the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto
abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of heth.

24:1 and abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the lord had
blessed abraham in all things.

24:2 and abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled
over all that he had, put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: 24:3
and i will make thee swear by the lord, the god of heaven, and the god
of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the
daughters of the canaanites, among whom i dwell: 24:4 but thou shalt
go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son
isaac.

24:5 and the servant said unto him, peradventure the woman will not be
willing to follow me unto this land: must i needs bring thy son again
unto the land from whence thou camest?  24:6 and abraham said unto
him, beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.

24:7 the lord god of heaven, which took me from my father's house, and
from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware
unto me, saying, unto thy seed will i give this land; he shall send
his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from
thence.

24:8 and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou
shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.

24:9 and the servant put his hand under the thigh of abraham his
master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

24:10 and the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and
departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he
arose, and went to mesopotamia, unto the city of nahor.

24:11 and he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well
of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out
to draw water.

24:12 and he said o lord god of my master abraham, i pray thee, send
me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master abraham.

24:13 behold, i stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of
the men of the city come out to draw water: 24:14 and let it come to
pass, that the damsel to whom i shall say, let down thy pitcher, i
pray thee, that i may drink; and she shall say, drink, and i will give
thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thy servant isaac; and thereby shall i know that thou hast shewed
kindness unto my master.

24:15 and it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold,
rebekah came out, who was born to bethuel, son of milcah, the wife of
nahor, abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.

24:16 and the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had
any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her
pitcher, and came up.

24:17 and the servant ran to meet her, and said, let me, i pray thee,
drink a little water of thy pitcher.

24:18 and she said, drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her
pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.

24:19 and when she had done giving him drink, she said, i will draw
water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.

24:20 and she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran
again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.

24:21 and the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the
lord had made his journey prosperous or not.

24:22 and it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the
man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets
for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; 24:23 and said, whose
daughter art thou? tell me, i pray thee: is there room in thy father's
house for us to lodge in?  24:24 and she said unto him, i am the
daughter of bethuel the son of milcah, which she bare unto nahor.

24:25 she said moreover unto him, we have both straw and provender
enough, and room to lodge in.

24:26 and the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the lord.

24:27 and he said, blessed be the lord god of my master abraham, who
hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: i being
in the way, the lord led me to the house of my master's brethren.

24:28 and the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these
things.

24:29 and rebekah had a brother, and his name was laban: and laban ran
out unto the man, unto the well.

24:30 and it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon
his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of rebekah his sister,
saying, thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and,
behold, he stood by the camels at the well.

24:31 and he said, come in, thou blessed of the lord; wherefore
standest thou without? for i have prepared the house, and room for the
camels.

24:32 and the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and
gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet,
and the men's feet that were with him.

24:33 and there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, i will
not eat, until i have told mine errand. and he said, speak on.

24:34 and he said, i am abraham's servant.

24:35 and the lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become
great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold,
and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.

24:36 and sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was
old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.

24:37 and my master made me swear, saying, thou shalt not take a wife
to my son of the daughters of the canaanites, in whose land i dwell:
24:38 but thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and
take a wife unto my son.

24:39 and i said unto my master, peradventure the woman will not
follow me.

24:40 and he said unto me, the lord, before whom i walk, will send his
angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for
my son of my kindred, and of my father's house: 24:41 then shalt thou
be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if
they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.

24:42 and i came this day unto the well, and said, o lord god of my
master abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which i go: 24:43
behold, i stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that
when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and i say to her, give me,
i pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink; 24:44 and she say
to me, both drink thou, and i will also draw for thy camels: let the
same be the woman whom the lord hath appointed out for my master's
son.

24:45 and before i had done speaking in mine heart, behold, rebekah
came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto
the well, and drew water: and i said unto her, let me drink, i pray
thee.

24:46 and she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder,
and said, drink, and i will give thy camels drink also: so i drank,
and she made the camels drink also.

24:47 and i asked her, and said, whose daughter art thou? and she
said, the daughter of bethuel, nahor's son, whom milcah bare unto him:
and i put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.

24:48 and i bowed down my head, and worshipped the lord, and blessed
the lord god of my master abraham, which had led me in the right way
to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.

24:49 and now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell
me: and if not, tell me; that i may turn to the right hand, or to the
left.

24:50 then laban and bethuel answered and said, the thing proceedeth
from the lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.

24:51 behold, rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be
thy master's son's wife, as the lord hath spoken.

24:52 and it came to pass, that, when abraham's servant heard their
words, he worshipped the lord, bowing himself to the earth.

24:53 and the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment, and gave them to rebekah: he gave also to her
brother and to her mother precious things.

24:54 and they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him,
and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said,
send me away unto my master.

24:55 and her brother and her mother said, let the damsel abide with
us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.

24:56 and he said unto them, hinder me not, seeing the lord hath
prospered my way; send me away that i may go to my master.

24:57 and they said, we will call the damsel, and enquire at her
mouth.

24:58 and they called rebekah, and said unto her, wilt thou go with
this man? and she said, i will go.

24:59 and they sent away rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
abraham's servant, and his men.

24:60 and they blessed rebekah, and said unto her, thou art our
sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed
possess the gate of those which hate them.

24:61 and rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and followed the man: and the servant took rebekah, and went
his way.

24:62 and isaac came from the way of the well lahairoi; for he dwelt
in the south country.

24:63 and isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and
he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.

24:64 and rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw isaac, she
lighted off the camel.

24:65 for she had said unto the servant, what man is this that walketh
in the field to meet us? and the servant had said, it is my master:
therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.

24:66 and the servant told isaac all things that he had done.

24:67 and isaac brought her into his mother sarah's tent, and took
rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and isaac was
comforted after his mother's death.

25:1 then again abraham took a wife, and her name was keturah.

25:2 and she bare him zimran, and jokshan, and medan, and midian, and
ishbak, and shuah.

25:3 and jokshan begat sheba, and dedan. and the sons of dedan were
asshurim, and letushim, and leummim.

25:4 and the sons of midian; ephah, and epher, and hanoch, and abidah,
and eldaah. all these were the children of keturah.

25:5 and abraham gave all that he had unto isaac.

25:6 but unto the sons of the concubines, which abraham had, abraham
gave gifts, and sent them away from isaac his son, while he yet lived,
eastward, unto the east country.

25:7 and these are the days of the years of abraham's life which he
lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.

25:8 then abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.

25:9 and his sons isaac and ishmael buried him in the cave of
machpelah, in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite, which
is before mamre; 25:10 the field which abraham purchased of the sons
of heth: there was abraham buried, and sarah his wife.

25:11 and it came to pass after the death of abraham, that god blessed
his son isaac; and isaac dwelt by the well lahairoi.

25:12 now these are the generations of ishmael, abraham's son, whom
hagar the egyptian, sarah's handmaid, bare unto abraham: 25:13 and
these are the names of the sons of ishmael, by their names, according
to their generations: the firstborn of ishmael, nebajoth; and kedar,
and adbeel, and mibsam, 25:14 and mishma, and dumah, and massa, 25:15
hadar, and tema, jetur, naphish, and kedemah: 25:16 these are the sons
of ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their
castles; twelve princes according to their nations.

25:17 and these are the years of the life of ishmael, an hundred and
thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
gathered unto his people.

25:18 and they dwelt from havilah unto shur, that is before egypt, as
thou goest toward assyria: and he died in the presence of all his
brethren.

25:19 and these are the generations of isaac, abraham's son: abraham
begat isaac: 25:20 and isaac was forty years old when he took rebekah
to wife, the daughter of bethuel the syrian of padanaram, the sister
to laban the syrian.

25:21 and isaac intreated the lord for his wife, because she was
barren: and the lord was intreated of him, and rebekah his wife
conceived.

25:22 and the children struggled together within her; and she said, if
it be so, why am i thus? and she went to enquire of the lord.

25:23 and the lord said unto her, two nations are in thy womb, and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall
serve the younger.

25:24 and when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there
were twins in her womb.

25:25 and the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and
they called his name esau.

25:26 and after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on
esau's heel; and his name was called jacob: and isaac was threescore
years old when she bare them.

25:27 and the boys grew: and esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field; and jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

25:28 and isaac loved esau, because he did eat of his venison: but
rebekah loved jacob.

25:29 and jacob sod pottage: and esau came from the field, and he was
faint: 25:30 and esau said to jacob, feed me, i pray thee, with that
same red pottage; for i am faint: therefore was his name called edom.

25:31 and jacob said, sell me this day thy birthright.

25:32 and esau said, behold, i am at the point to die: and what profit
shall this birthright do to me?  25:33 and jacob said, swear to me
this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto
jacob.

25:34 then jacob gave esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did
eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus esau despised his
birthright.

26:1 and there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that
was in the days of abraham. and isaac went unto abimelech king of the
philistines unto gerar.

26:2 and the lord appeared unto him, and said, go not down into egypt;
dwell in the land which i shall tell thee of: 26:3 sojourn in this
land, and i will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and
unto thy seed, i will give all these countries, and i will perform the
oath which i sware unto abraham thy father; 26:4 and i will make thy
seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed
all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed; 26:5 because that abraham obeyed my voice, and kept
my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.

26:6 and isaac dwelt in gerar: 26:7 and the men of the place asked him
of his wife; and he said, she is my sister: for he feared to say, she
is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for
rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.

26:8 and it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that
abimelech king of the philistines looked out at a window, and saw,
and, behold, isaac was sporting with rebekah his wife.

26:9 and abimelech called isaac, and said, behold, of a surety she is
thy wife; and how saidst thou, she is my sister? and isaac said unto
him, because i said, lest i die for her.

26:10 and abimelech said, what is this thou hast done unto us? one of
the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest
have brought guiltiness upon us.

26:11 and abimelech charged all his people, saying, he that toucheth
this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.

26:12 then isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an
hundredfold: and the lord blessed him.

26:13 and the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he
became very great: 26:14 for he had possession of flocks, and
possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the philistines
envied him.

26:15 for all the wells which his father's servants had digged in the
days of abraham his father, the philistines had stopped them, and
filled them with earth.

26:16 and abimelech said unto isaac, go from us; for thou art much
mightier than we.

26:17 and isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of
gerar, and dwelt there.

26:18 and isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged
in the days of abraham his father; for the philistines had stopped
them after the death of abraham: and he called their names after the
names by which his father had called them.

26:19 and isaac's servants digged in the valley, and found there a
well of springing water.

26:20 and the herdmen of gerar did strive with isaac's herdmen,
saying, the water is ours: and he called the name of the well esek;
because they strove with him.

26:21 and they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he
called the name of it sitnah.

26:22 and he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for
that they strove not: and he called the name of it rehoboth; and he
said, for now the lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful
in the land.

26:23 and he went up from thence to beersheba.

26:24 and the lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, i am
the god of abraham thy father: fear not, for i am with thee, and will
bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant abraham's sake.

26:25 and he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the
lord, and pitched his tent there: and there isaac's servants digged a
well.

26:26 then abimelech went to him from gerar, and ahuzzath one of his
friends, and phichol the chief captain of his army.

26:27 and isaac said unto them, wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye
hate me, and have sent me away from you?  26:28 and they said, we saw
certainly that the lord was with thee: and we said, let there be now
an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a
covenant with thee; 26:29 that thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not
touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have
sent thee away in peace: thou art now the blessed of the lord.

26:30 and he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.

26:31 and they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to
another: and isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in
peace.

26:32 and it came to pass the same day, that isaac's servants came,
and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto
him, we have found water.

26:33 and he called it shebah: therefore the name of the city is
beersheba unto this day.

26:34 and esau was forty years old when he took to wife judith the
daughter of beeri the hittite, and bashemath the daughter of elon the
hittite: 26:35 which were a grief of mind unto isaac and to rebekah.

27:1 and it came to pass, that when isaac was old, and his eyes were
dim, so that he could not see, he called esau his eldest son, and said
unto him, my son: and he said unto him, behold, here am i.

27:2 and he said, behold now, i am old, i know not the day of my
death: 27:3 now therefore take, i pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver
and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 27:4
and make me savoury meat, such as i love, and bring it to me, that i
may eat; that my soul may bless thee before i die.

27:5 and rebekah heard when isaac spake to esau his son. and esau went
to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.

27:6 and rebekah spake unto jacob her son, saying, behold, i heard thy
father speak unto esau thy brother, saying, 27:7 bring me venison, and
make me savoury meat, that i may eat, and bless thee before the lord
before my death.

27:8 now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which i
command thee.

27:9 go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of
the goats; and i will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as
he loveth: 27:10 and thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may
eat, and that he may bless thee before his death.

27:11 and jacob said to rebekah his mother, behold, esau my brother is
a hairy man, and i am a smooth man: 27:12 my father peradventure will
feel me, and i shall seem to him as a deceiver; and i shall bring a
curse upon me, and not a blessing.

27:13 and his mother said unto him, upon me be thy curse, my son: only
obey my voice, and go fetch me them.

27:14 and he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and
his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.

27:15 and rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son esau, which
were with her in the house, and put them upon jacob her younger son:
27:16 and she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands,
and upon the smooth of his neck: 27:17 and she gave the savoury meat
and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son jacob.

27:18 and he came unto his father, and said, my father: and he said,
here am i; who art thou, my son?  27:19 and jacob said unto his
father, i am esau thy first born; i have done according as thou badest
me: arise, i pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may
bless me.

27:20 and isaac said unto his son, how is it that thou hast found it
so quickly, my son? and he said, because the lord thy god brought it
to me.

27:21 and isaac said unto jacob, come near, i pray thee, that i may
feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son esau or not.

27:22 and jacob went near unto isaac his father; and he felt him, and
said, the voice is jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of esau.

27:23 and he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his
brother esau's hands: so he blessed him.

27:24 and he said, art thou my very son esau? and he said, i am.

27:25 and he said, bring it near to me, and i will eat of my son's
venison, that my soul may bless thee. and he brought it near to him,
and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank.

27:26 and his father isaac said unto him, come near now, and kiss me,
my son.

27:27 and he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of
his raiment, and blessed him, and said, see, the smell of my son is as
the smell of a field which the lord hath blessed: 27:28 therefore god
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and
plenty of corn and wine: 27:29 let people serve thee, and nations bow
down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow
down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he
that blesseth thee.

27:30 and it came to pass, as soon as isaac had made an end of
blessing jacob, and jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of
isaac his father, that esau his brother came in from his hunting.

27:31 and he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto his father, let my father arise, and eat of his
son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.

27:32 and isaac his father said unto him, who art thou? and he said, i
am thy son, thy firstborn esau.

27:33 and isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, who? where is he
that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and i have eaten of all
before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be
blessed.

27:34 and when esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a
great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, bless me,
even me also, o my father.

27:35 and he said, thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away
thy blessing.

27:36 and he said, is not he rightly named jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and,
behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. and he said, hast thou not
reserved a blessing for me?  27:37 and isaac answered and said unto
esau, behold, i have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have i
given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have i sustained
him: and what shall i do now unto thee, my son?  27:38 and esau said
unto his father, hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even
me also, o my father. and esau lifted up his voice, and wept.

27:39 and isaac his father answered and said unto him, behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven
from above; 27:40 and by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve
thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the
dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.

27:41 and esau hated jacob because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him: and esau said in his heart, the days of mourning
for my father are at hand; then will i slay my brother jacob.

27:42 and these words of esau her elder son were told to rebekah: and
she sent and called jacob her younger son, and said unto him, behold,
thy brother esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to
kill thee.

27:43 now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flee thou to laban
my brother to haran; 27:44 and tarry with him a few days, until thy
brother's fury turn away; 27:45 until thy brother's anger turn away
from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then i will
send, and fetch thee from thence: why should i be deprived also of you
both in one day?  27:46 and rebekah said to isaac, i am weary of my
life because of the daughters of heth: if jacob take a wife of the
daughters of heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?  28:1 and isaac called jacob, and
blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, thou shalt not take a
wife of the daughters of canaan.

28:2 arise, go to padanaram, to the house of bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughers of laban thy
mother's brother.

28:3 and god almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply
thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 28:4 and give thee
the blessing of abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou
mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which god gave
unto abraham.

28:5 and isaac sent away jacob: and he went to padanaram unto laban,
son of bethuel the syrian, the brother of rebekah, jacob's and esau's
mother.

28:6 when esau saw that isaac had blessed jacob, and sent him away to
padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him
he gave him a charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughers of canaan; 28:7 and that jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to padanaram; 28:8 and esau seeing that the
daughters of canaan pleased not isaac his father; 28:9 then went esau
unto ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had mahalath the
daughter of ishmael abraham's son, the sister of nebajoth, to be his
wife.

28:10 and jacob went out from beersheba, and went toward haran.

28:11 and he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep.

28:12 and he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the
top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of god ascending
and descending on it.

28:13 and, behold, the lord stood above it, and said, i am the lord
god of abraham thy father, and the god of isaac: the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will i give it, and to thy seed; 28:14 and thy seed
shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the
west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee
and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

28:15 and, behold, i am with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for i
will not leave thee, until i have done that which i have spoken to
thee of.

28:16 and jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, surely the lord
is in this place; and i knew it not.

28:17 and he was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place! this is
none other but the house of god, and this is the gate of heaven.

28:18 and jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that
he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil
upon the top of it.

28:19 and he called the name of that place bethel: but the name of
that city was called luz at the first.

28:20 and jacob vowed a vow, saying, if god will be with me, and will
keep me in this way that i go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, 28:21 so that i come again to my father's house in
peace; then shall the lord be my god: 28:22 and this stone, which i
have set for a pillar, shall be god's house: and of all that thou
shalt give me i will surely give the tenth unto thee.

29:1 then jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the
people of the east.

29:2 and he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there
were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they
watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well's mouth.

29:3 and thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the
stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone
again upon the well's mouth in his place.

29:4 and jacob said unto them, my brethren, whence be ye? and they
said, of haran are we.

29:5 and he said unto them, know ye laban the son of nahor? and they
said, we know him.

29:6 and he said unto them, is he well? and they said, he is well:
and, behold, rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.

29:7 and he said, lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the
cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and
feed them.

29:8 and they said, we cannot, until all the flocks be gathered
together, and till they roll the stone from the well's mouth; then we
water the sheep.

29:9 and while he yet spake with them, rachel came with her father's
sheep; for she kept them.

29:10 and it came to pass, when jacob saw rachel the daughter of laban
his mother's brother, and the sheep of laban his mother's brother,
that jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and
watered the flock of laban his mother's brother.

29:11 and jacob kissed rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.

29:12 and jacob told rachel that he was her father's brother, and that
he was rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father.

29:13 and it came to pass, when laban heard the tidings of jacob his
sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed
him, and brought him to his house. and he told laban all these things.

29:14 and laban said to him, surely thou art my bone and my flesh. and
he abode with him the space of a month.

29:15 and laban said unto jacob, because thou art my brother,
shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy
wages be?  29:16 and laban had two daughters: the name of the elder
was leah, and the name of the younger was rachel.

29:17 leah was tender eyed; but rachel was beautiful and well
favoured.

29:18 and jacob loved rachel; and said, i will serve thee seven years
for rachel thy younger daughter.

29:19 and laban said, it is better that i give her to thee, than that
i should give her to another man: abide with me.

29:20 and jacob served seven years for rachel; and they seemed unto
him but a few days, for the love he had to her.

29:21 and jacob said unto laban, give me my wife, for my days are
fulfilled, that i may go in unto her.

29:22 and laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a
feast.

29:23 and it came to pass in the evening, that he took leah his
daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.

29:24 and laban gave unto his daughter leah zilpah his maid for an
handmaid.

29:25 and it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was leah:
and he said to laban, what is this thou hast done unto me? did not i
serve with thee for rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
29:26 and laban said, it must not be so done in our country, to give
the younger before the firstborn.

29:27 fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service
which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.

29:28 and jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him rachel
his daughter to wife also.

29:29 and laban gave to rachel his daughter bilhah his handmaid to be
her maid.

29:30 and he went in also unto rachel, and he loved also rachel more
than leah, and served with him yet seven other years.

29:31 and when the lord saw that leah was hated, he opened her womb:
but rachel was barren.

29:32 and leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name
reuben: for she said, surely the lord hath looked upon my affliction;
now therefore my husband will love me.

29:33 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, because the
lord hath heard i was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also:
and she called his name simeon.

29:34 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, now this time
will my husband be joined unto me, because i have born him three sons:
therefore was his name called levi.

29:35 and she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, now will
i praise the lord: therefore she called his name judah; and left
bearing.

30:1 and when rachel saw that she bare jacob no children, rachel
envied her sister; and said unto jacob, give me children, or else i
die.

30:2 and jacob's anger was kindled against rachel: and he said, am i
in god's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
30:3 and she said, behold my maid bilhah, go in unto her; and she
shall bear upon my knees, that i may also have children by her.

30:4 and she gave him bilhah her handmaid to wife: and jacob went in
unto her.

30:5 and bilhah conceived, and bare jacob a son.

30:6 and rachel said, god hath judged me, and hath also heard my
voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name dan.

30:7 and bilhah rachel's maid conceived again, and bare jacob a second
son.

30:8 and rachel said, with great wrestlings have i wrestled with my
sister, and i have prevailed: and she called his name naphtali.

30:9 when leah saw that she had left bearing, she took zilpah her
maid, and gave her jacob to wife.

30:10 and zilpah leah's maid bare jacob a son.

30:11 and leah said, a troop cometh: and she called his name gad.

30:12 and zilpah leah's maid bare jacob a second son.

30:13 and leah said, happy am i, for the daughters will call me
blessed: and she called his name asher.

30:14 and reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found
mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother leah. then
rachel said to leah, give me, i pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.

30:15 and she said unto her, is it a small matter that thou hast taken
my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? and
rachel said, therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son's
mandrakes.

30:16 and jacob came out of the field in the evening, and leah went
out to meet him, and said, thou must come in unto me; for surely i
have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. and he lay with her that
night.

30:17 and god hearkened unto leah, and she conceived, and bare jacob
the fifth son.

30:18 and leah said, god hath given me my hire, because i have given
my maiden to my husband: and she called his name issachar.

30:19 and leah conceived again, and bare jacob the sixth son.

30:20 and leah said, god hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my
husband dwell with me, because i have born him six sons: and she
called his name zebulun.

30:21 and afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name dinah.

30:22 and god remembered rachel, and god hearkened to her, and opened
her womb.

30:23 and she conceived, and bare a son; and said, god hath taken away
my reproach: 30:24 and she called his name joseph; and said, the lord
shall add to me another son.

30:25 and it came to pass, when rachel had born joseph, that jacob
said unto laban, send me away, that i may go unto mine own place, and
to my country.

30:26 give me my wives and my children, for whom i have served thee,
and let me go: for thou knowest my service which i have done thee.

30:27 and laban said unto him, i pray thee, if i have found favour in
thine eyes, tarry: for i have learned by experience that the lord hath
blessed me for thy sake.

30:28 and he said, appoint me thy wages, and i will give it.

30:29 and he said unto him, thou knowest how i have served thee, and
how thy cattle was with me.

30:30 for it was little which thou hadst before i came, and it is now
increased unto a multitude; and the lord hath blessed thee since my
coming: and now when shall i provide for mine own house also?  30:31
and he said, what shall i give thee? and jacob said, thou shalt not
give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, i will again
feed and keep thy flock.

30:32 i will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence
all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among
the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such
shall be my hire.

30:33 so shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it
shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled
and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be
counted stolen with me.

30:34 and laban said, behold, i would it might be according to thy
word.

30:35 and he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and
spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and
every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the
sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.

30:36 and he set three days' journey betwixt himself and jacob: and
jacob fed the rest of laban's flocks.

30:37 and jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and
chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white
appear which was in the rods.

30:38 and he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the
gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that
they should conceive when they came to drink.

30:39 and the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth
cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.

30:40 and jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the
flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of
laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto
laban's cattle.

30:41 and it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did
conceive, that jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in
the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.

30:42 but when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the
feebler were laban's, and the stronger jacob's.

30:43 and the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.

31:1 and he heard the words of laban's sons, saying, jacob hath taken
away all that was our father's; and of that which was our father's
hath he gotten all this glory.

31:2 and jacob beheld the countenance of laban, and, behold, it was
not toward him as before.

31:3 and the lord said unto jacob, return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred; and i will be with thee.

31:4 and jacob sent and called rachel and leah to the field unto his
flock, 31:5 and said unto them, i see your father's countenance, that
it is not toward me as before; but the god of my father hath been with
me.

31:6 and ye know that with all my power i have served your father.

31:7 and your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times;
but god suffered him not to hurt me.

31:8 if he said thus, the speckled shall be thy wages; then all the
cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, the ringstraked shall be
thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.

31:9 thus god hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given
them to me.

31:10 and it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that
i lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which
leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.

31:11 and the angel of god spake unto me in a dream, saying, jacob:
and i said, here am i.

31:12 and he said, lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which
leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for i
have seen all that laban doeth unto thee.

31:13 i am the god of bethel, where thou anointedst the pillar, and
where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this
land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.

31:14 and rachel and leah answered and said unto him, is there yet any
portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?  31:15 are we not
counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured
also our money.

31:16 for all the riches which god hath taken from our father, that is
ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever god hath said unto
thee, do.

31:17 then jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
31:18 and he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
padanaram, for to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan.

31:19 and laban went to shear his sheep: and rachel had stolen the
images that were her father's.

31:20 and jacob stole away unawares to laban the syrian, in that he
told him not that he fled.

31:21 so he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over
the river, and set his face toward the mount gilead.

31:22 and it was told laban on the third day that jacob was fled.

31:23 and he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven
days' journey; and they overtook him in the mount gilead.

31:24 and god came to laban the syrian in a dream by night, and said
unto him, take heed that thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:25 then laban overtook jacob. now jacob had pitched his tent in the
mount: and laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of gilead.

31:26 and laban said to jacob, what hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives
taken with the sword?  31:27 wherefore didst thou flee away secretly,
and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that i might have sent
thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
31:28 and hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou
hast now done foolishly in so doing.

31:29 it is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the god of
your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, take thou heed that
thou speak not to jacob either good or bad.

31:30 and now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore
longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my
gods?  31:31 and jacob answered and said to laban, because i was
afraid: for i said, peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy
daughters from me.

31:32 with whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before
our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee.
for jacob knew not that rachel had stolen them.

31:33 and laban went into jacob's tent, and into leah's tent, and into
the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. then went he out
of leah's tent, and entered into rachel's tent.

31:34 now rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's
furniture, and sat upon them. and laban searched all the tent, but
found them not.

31:35 and she said to her father, let it not displease my lord that i
cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. and he
searched but found not the images.

31:36 and jacob was wroth, and chode with laban: and jacob answered
and said to laban, what is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast
so hotly pursued after me?  31:37 whereas thou hast searched all my
stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here
before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us
both.

31:38 this twenty years have i been with thee; thy ewes and thy she
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have i not
eaten.

31:39 that which was torn of beasts i brought not unto thee; i bare
the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by
day, or stolen by night.

31:40 thus i was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by
night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.

31:41 thus have i been twenty years in thy house; i served thee
fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle:
and thou hast changed my wages ten times.

31:42 except the god of my father, the god of abraham, and the fear of
isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. god
hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight.

31:43 and laban answered and said unto jacob, these daughters are my
daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my
cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can i do this day
unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
31:44 now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, i and thou; and
let it be for a witness between me and thee.

31:45 and jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.

31:46 and jacob said unto his brethren, gather stones; and they took
stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.

31:47 and laban called it jegarsahadutha: but jacob called it galeed.

31:48 and laban said, this heap is a witness between me and thee this
day.

therefore was the name of it called galeed; 31:49 and mizpah; for he
said, the lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another.

31:50 if thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other
wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, god is witness
betwixt me and thee.

31:51 and laban said to jacob, behold this heap, and behold this
pillar, which i have cast betwixt me and thee: 31:52 this heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that i will not pass over this
heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this
pillar unto me, for harm.

31:53 the god of abraham, and the god of nahor, the god of their
father, judge betwixt us. and jacob sware by the fear of his father
isaac.

31:54 then jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his
brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night
in the mount.

31:55 and early in the morning laban rose up, and kissed his sons and
his daughters, and blessed them: and laban departed, and returned unto
his place.

32:1 and jacob went on his way, and the angels of god met him.

32:2 and when jacob saw them, he said, this is god's host: and he
called the name of that place mahanaim.

32:3 and jacob sent messengers before him to esau his brother unto the
land of seir, the country of edom.

32:4 and he commanded them, saying, thus shall ye speak unto my lord
esau; thy servant jacob saith thus, i have sojourned with laban, and
stayed there until now: 32:5 and i have oxen, and asses, flocks, and
menservants, and womenservants: and i have sent to tell my lord, that
i may find grace in thy sight.

32:6 and the messengers returned to jacob, saying, we came to thy
brother esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him.

32:7 then jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the
people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels,
into two bands; 32:8 and said, if esau come to the one company, and
smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.

32:9 and jacob said, o god of my father abraham, and god of my father
isaac, the lord which saidst unto me, return unto thy country, and to
thy kindred, and i will deal well with thee: 32:10 i am not worthy of
the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast
shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff i passed over this jordan;
and now i am become two bands.

32:11 deliver me, i pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the
hand of esau: for i fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the
mother with the children.

32:12 and thou saidst, i will surely do thee good, and make thy seed
as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.

32:13 and he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came
to his hand a present for esau his brother; 32:14 two hundred she
goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams, 32:15
thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls,
twenty she asses, and ten foals.

32:16 and he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove
by themselves; and said unto his servants, pass over before me, and
put a space betwixt drove and drove.

32:17 and he commanded the foremost, saying, when esau my brother
meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, whose art thou? and whither
goest thou? and whose are these before thee?  32:18 then thou shalt
say, they be thy servant jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord
esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.

32:19 and so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that
followed the droves, saying, on this manner shall ye speak unto esau,
when ye find him.

32:20 and say ye moreover, behold, thy servant jacob is behind us. for
he said, i will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and
afterward i will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.

32:21 so went the present over before him: and himself lodged that
night in the company.

32:22 and he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two
womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford jabbok.

32:23 and he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over
that he had.

32:24 and jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him
until the breaking of the day.

32:25 and when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched
the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of jacob's thigh was out of
joint, as he wrestled with him.

32:26 and he said, let me go, for the day breaketh. and he said, i
will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

32:27 and he said unto him, what is thy name? and he said, jacob.

32:28 and he said, thy name shall be called no more jacob, but israel:
for as a prince hast thou power with god and with men, and hast
prevailed.

32:29 and jacob asked him, and said, tell me, i pray thee, thy name.
and he said, wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? and he
blessed him there.

32:30 and jacob called the name of the place peniel: for i have seen
god face to face, and my life is preserved.

32:31 and as he passed over penuel the sun rose upon him, and he
halted upon his thigh.

32:32 therefore the children of israel eat not of the sinew which
shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because
he touched the hollow of jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.

33:1 and jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, esau came,
and with him four hundred men. and he divided the children unto leah,
and unto rachel, and unto the two handmaids.

33:2 and he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and leah
and her children after, and rachel and joseph hindermost.

33:3 and he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother.

33:4 and esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck,
and kissed him: and they wept.

33:5 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children;
and said, who are those with thee? and he said, the children which god
hath graciously given thy servant.

33:6 then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they
bowed themselves.

33:7 and leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves:
and after came joseph near and rachel, and they bowed themselves.

33:8 and he said, what meanest thou by all this drove which i met? and
he said, these are to find grace in the sight of my lord.

33:9 and esau said, i have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast
unto thyself.

33:10 and jacob said, nay, i pray thee, if now i have found grace in
thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore i have
seen thy face, as though i had seen the face of god, and thou wast
pleased with me.

33:11 take, i pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because
god hath dealt graciously with me, and because i have enough. and he
urged him, and he took it.

33:12 and he said, let us take our journey, and let us go, and i will
go before thee.

33:13 and he said unto him, my lord knoweth that the children are
tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men
should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.

33:14 let my lord, i pray thee, pass over before his servant: and i
will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and
the children be able to endure, until i come unto my lord unto seir.

33:15 and esau said, let me now leave with thee some of the folk that
are with me. and he said, what needeth it? let me find grace in the
sight of my lord.

33:16 so esau returned that day on his way unto seir.

33:17 and jacob journeyed to succoth, and built him an house, and made
booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called
succoth.

33:18 and jacob came to shalem, a city of shechem, which is in the
land of canaan, when he came from padanaram; and pitched his tent
before the city.

33:19 and he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent,
at the hand of the children of hamor, shechem's father, for an hundred
pieces of money.

33:20 and he erected there an altar, and called it eleloheisrael.

34:1 and dinah the daughter of leah, which she bare unto jacob, went
out to see the daughters of the land.

34:2 and when shechem the son of hamor the hivite, prince of the
country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.

34:3 and his soul clave unto dinah the daughter of jacob, and he loved
the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.

34:4 and shechem spake unto his father hamor, saying, get me this
damsel to wife.

34:5 and jacob heard that he had defiled dinah his daughter: now his
sons were with his cattle in the field: and jacob held his peace until
they were come.

34:6 and hamor the father of shechem went out unto jacob to commune
with him.

34:7 and the sons of jacob came out of the field when they heard it:
and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had
wrought folly in israel in lying with jacob's daughter: which thing
ought not to be done.

34:8 and hamor communed with them, saying, the soul of my son shechem
longeth for your daughter: i pray you give her him to wife.

34:9 and make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us,
and take our daughters unto you.

34:10 and ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you;
dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.

34:11 and shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me i will give.

34:12 ask me never so much dowry and gift, and i will give according
as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.

34:13 and the sons of jacob answered shechem and hamor his father
deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled dinah their sister:
34:14 and they said unto them, we cannot do this thing, to give our
sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:
34:15 but in this will we consent unto you: if ye will be as we be,
that every male of you be circumcised; 34:16 then will we give our
daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will
dwell with you, and we will become one people.

34:17 but if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will
we take our daughter, and we will be gone.

34:18 and their words pleased hamor, and shechem hamor's son.

34:19 and the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had
delight in jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than all the
house of his father.

34:20 and hamor and shechem his son came unto the gate of their city,
and communed with the men of their city, saying, 34:21 these men are
peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade
therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us
take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our
daughters.

34:22 only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us,
to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are
circumcised.

34:23 shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of
their's be our's? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell
with us.

34:24 and unto hamor and unto shechem his son hearkened all that went
out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that
went out of the gate of his city.

34:25 and it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that
two of the sons of jacob, simeon and levi, dinah's brethren, took each
man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.

34:26 and they slew hamor and shechem his son with the edge of the
sword, and took dinah out of shechem's house, and went out.

34:27 the sons of jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city,
because they had defiled their sister.

34:28 they took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that
which was in the city, and that which was in the field, 34:29 and all
their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they
captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.

34:30 and jacob said to simeon and levi, ye have troubled me to make
me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the canaanites
and the perizzites: and i being few in number, they shall gather
themselves together against me, and slay me; and i shall be destroyed,
i and my house.

34:31 and they said, should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?
35:1 and god said unto jacob, arise, go up to bethel, and dwell there:
and make there an altar unto god, that appeared unto thee when thou
fleddest from the face of esau thy brother.

35:2 then jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with
him, put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and
change your garments: 35:3 and let us arise, and go up to bethel; and
i will make there an altar unto god, who answered me in the day of my
distress, and was with me in the way which i went.

35:4 and they gave unto jacob all the strange gods which were in their
hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and jacob hid
them under the oak which was by shechem.

35:5 and they journeyed: and the terror of god was upon the cities
that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of
jacob.

35:6 so jacob came to luz, which is in the land of canaan, that is,
bethel, he and all the people that were with him.

35:7 and he built there an altar, and called the place elbethel:
because there god appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his
brother.

35:8 but deborah rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath
bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called allonbachuth.

35:9 and god appeared unto jacob again, when he came out of padanaram,
and blessed him.

35:10 and god said unto him, thy name is jacob: thy name shall not be
called any more jacob, but israel shall be thy name: and he called his
name israel.

35:11 and god said unto him, i am god almighty: be fruitful and
multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and
kings shall come out of thy loins; 35:12 and the land which i gave
abraham and isaac, to thee i will give it, and to thy seed after thee
will i give the land.

35:13 and god went up from him in the place where he talked with him.

35:14 and jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him,
even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon.

35:15 and jacob called the name of the place where god spake with him,
bethel.

35:16 and they journeyed from bethel; and there was but a little way
to come to ephrath: and rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.

35:17 and it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the
midwife said unto her, fear not; thou shalt have this son also.

35:18 and it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she
died) that she called his name benoni: but his father called him
benjamin.

35:19 and rachel died, and was buried in the way to ephrath, which is
bethlehem.

35:20 and jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of
rachel's grave unto this day.

35:21 and israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of
edar.

35:22 and it came to pass, when israel dwelt in that land, that reuben
went and lay with bilhah his father's concubine: and israel heard it.
now the sons of jacob were twelve: 35:23 the sons of leah; reuben,
jacob's firstborn, and simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and
zebulun: 35:24 the sons of rachel; joseph, and benjamin: 35:25 and the
sons of bilhah, rachel's handmaid; dan, and naphtali: 35:26 and the
sons of zilpah, leah's handmaid: gad, and asher: these are the sons of
jacob, which were born to him in padanaram.

35:27 and jacob came unto isaac his father unto mamre, unto the city
of arbah, which is hebron, where abraham and isaac sojourned.

35:28 and the days of isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

35:29 and isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his
people, being old and full of days: and his sons esau and jacob buried
him.

36:1 now these are the generations of esau, who is edom.

36:2 esau took his wives of the daughters of canaan; adah the daughter
of elon the hittite, and aholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter
of zibeon the hivite; 36:3 and bashemath ishmael's daughter, sister of
nebajoth.

36:4 and adah bare to esau eliphaz; and bashemath bare reuel; 36:5 and
aholibamah bare jeush, and jaalam, and korah: these are the sons of
esau, which were born unto him in the land of canaan.

36:6 and esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all
the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all
his substance, which he had got in the land of canaan; and went into
the country from the face of his brother jacob.

36:7 for their riches were more than that they might dwell together;
and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because
of their cattle.

36:8 thus dwelt esau in mount seir: esau is edom.

36:9 and these are the generations of esau the father of the edomites
in mount seir: 36:10 these are the names of esau's sons; eliphaz the
son of adah the wife of esau, reuel the son of bashemath the wife of
esau.

36:11 and the sons of eliphaz were teman, omar, zepho, and gatam, and
kenaz.

36:12 and timna was concubine to eliphaz esau's son; and she bare to
eliphaz amalek: these were the sons of adah esau's wife.

36:13 and these are the sons of reuel; nahath, and zerah, shammah, and
mizzah: these were the sons of bashemath esau's wife.

36:14 and these were the sons of aholibamah, the daughter of anah the
daughter of zibeon, esau's wife: and she bare to esau jeush, and
jaalam, and korah.

36:15 these were dukes of the sons of esau: the sons of eliphaz the
firstborn son of esau; duke teman, duke omar, duke zepho, duke kenaz,
36:16 duke korah, duke gatam, and duke amalek: these are the dukes
that came of eliphaz in the land of edom; these were the sons of adah.

36:17 and these are the sons of reuel esau's son; duke nahath, duke
zerah, duke shammah, duke mizzah: these are the dukes that came of
reuel in the land of edom; these are the sons of bashemath esau's
wife.

36:18 and these are the sons of aholibamah esau's wife; duke jeush,
duke jaalam, duke korah: these were the dukes that came of aholibamah
the daughter of anah, esau's wife.

36:19 these are the sons of esau, who is edom, and these are their
dukes.

36:20 these are the sons of seir the horite, who inhabited the land;
lotan, and shobal, and zibeon, and anah, 36:21 and dishon, and ezer,
and dishan: these are the dukes of the horites, the children of seir
in the land of edom.

36:22 and the children of lotan were hori and hemam; and lotan's
sister was timna.

36:23 and the children of shobal were these; alvan, and manahath, and
ebal, shepho, and onam.

36:24 and these are the children of zibeon; both ajah, and anah: this
was that anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the
asses of zibeon his father.

36:25 and the children of anah were these; dishon, and aholibamah the
daughter of anah.

36:26 and these are the children of dishon; hemdan, and eshban, and
ithran, and cheran.

36:27 the children of ezer are these; bilhan, and zaavan, and akan.

36:28 the children of dishan are these; uz, and aran.

36:29 these are the dukes that came of the horites; duke lotan, duke
shobal, duke zibeon, duke anah, 36:30 duke dishon, duke ezer, duke
dishan: these are the dukes that came of hori, among their dukes in
the land of seir.

36:31 and these are the kings that reigned in the land of edom, before
there reigned any king over the children of israel.

36:32 and bela the son of beor reigned in edom: and the name of his
city was dinhabah.

36:33 and bela died, and jobab the son of zerah of bozrah reigned in
his stead.

36:34 and jobab died, and husham of the land of temani reigned in his
stead.

36:35 and husham died, and hadad the son of bedad, who smote midian in
the field of moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was
avith.

36:36 and hadad died, and samlah of masrekah reigned in his stead.

36:37 and samlah died, and saul of rehoboth by the river reigned in
his stead.

36:38 and saul died, and baalhanan the son of achbor reigned in his
stead.

36:39 and baalhanan the son of achbor died, and hadar reigned in his
stead: and the name of his city was pau; and his wife's name was
mehetabel, the daughter of matred, the daughter of mezahab.

36:40 and these are the names of the dukes that came of esau,
according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke
timnah, duke alvah, duke jetheth, 36:41 duke aholibamah, duke elah,
duke pinon, 36:42 duke kenaz, duke teman, duke mibzar, 36:43 duke
magdiel, duke iram: these be the dukes of edom, according to their
habitations in the land of their possession: he is esau the father of
the edomites.

37:1 and jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in
the land of canaan.

37:2 these are the generations of jacob. joseph, being seventeen years
old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the
sons of bilhah, and with the sons of zilpah, his father's wives: and
joseph brought unto his father their evil report.

37:3 now israel loved joseph more than all his children, because he
was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.

37:4 and when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than
all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto
him.

37:5 and joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they
hated him yet the more.

37:6 and he said unto them, hear, i pray you, this dream which i have
dreamed: 37:7 for, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and,
lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves
stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.

37:8 and his brethren said to him, shalt thou indeed reign over us? or
shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? and they hated him yet the
more for his dreams, and for his words.

37:9 and he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and
said, behold, i have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and
the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.

37:10 and he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his
father rebuked him, and said unto him, what is this dream that thou
hast dreamed?  shall i and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to
bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?  37:11 and his brethren
envied him; but his father observed the saying.

37:12 and his brethren went to feed their father's flock in shechem.

37:13 and israel said unto joseph, do not thy brethren feed the flock
in shechem? come, and i will send thee unto them. and he said to him,
here am i.

37:14 and he said to him, go, i pray thee, see whether it be well with
thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. so he
sent him out of the vale of hebron, and he came to shechem.

37:15 and a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in
the field: and the man asked him, saying, what seekest thou?  37:16
and he said, i seek my brethren: tell me, i pray thee, where they feed
their flocks.

37:17 and the man said, they are departed hence; for i heard them say,
let us go to dothan. and joseph went after his brethren, and found
them in dothan.

37:18 and when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto
them, they conspired against him to slay him.

37:19 and they said one to another, behold, this dreamer cometh.

37:20 come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some
pit, and we will say, some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall
see what will become of his dreams.

37:21 and reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands;
and said, let us not kill him.

37:22 and reuben said unto them, shed no blood, but cast him into this
pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might
rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.

37:23 and it came to pass, when joseph was come unto his brethren,
that they stript joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that
was on him; 37:24 and they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the
pit was empty, there was no water in it.

37:25 and they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes
and looked, and, behold, a company of ishmeelites came from gilead
with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry
it down to egypt.

37:26 and judah said unto his brethren, what profit is it if we slay
our brother, and conceal his blood?  37:27 come, and let us sell him
to the ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our
brother and our flesh. and his brethren were content.

37:28 then there passed by midianites merchantmen; and they drew and
lifted up joseph out of the pit, and sold joseph to the ishmeelites
for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought joseph into egypt.

37:29 and reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, joseph was not in
the pit; and he rent his clothes.

37:30 and he returned unto his brethren, and said, the child is not;
and i, whither shall i go?  37:31 and they took joseph's coat, and
killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood; 37:32 and
they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their
father; and said, this have we found: know now whether it be thy son's
coat or no.

37:33 and he knew it, and said, it is my son's coat; an evil beast
hath devoured him; joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.

37:34 and jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins,
and mourned for his son many days.

37:35 and all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him;
but he refused to be comforted; and he said, for i will go down into
the grave unto my son mourning. thus his father wept for him.

37:36 and the midianites sold him into egypt unto potiphar, an officer
of pharaoh's, and captain of the guard.

38:1 and it came to pass at that time, that judah went down from his
brethren, and turned in to a certain adullamite, whose name was hirah.

38:2 and judah saw there a daughter of a certain canaanite, whose name
was shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.

38:3 and she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name er.

38:4 and she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name
onan.

38:5 and she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name
shelah: and he was at chezib, when she bare him.

38:6 and judah took a wife for er his firstborn, whose name was tamar.

38:7 and er, judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the lord;
and the lord slew him.

38:8 and judah said unto onan, go in unto thy brother's wife, and
marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.

38:9 and onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to
pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it on
the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.

38:10 and the thing which he did displeased the lord: wherefore he
slew him also.

38:11 then said judah to tamar his daughter in law, remain a widow at
thy father's house, till shelah my son be grown: for he said, lest
peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. and tamar went and
dwelt in her father's house.

38:12 and in process of time the daughter of shuah judah's wife died;
and judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to
timnath, he and his friend hirah the adullamite.

38:13 and it was told tamar, saying, behold thy father in law goeth up
to timnath to shear his sheep.

38:14 and she put her widow's garments off from her, and covered her
with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is
by the way to timnath; for she saw that shelah was grown, and she was
not given unto him to wife.

38:15 when judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she
had covered her face.

38:16 and he turned unto her by the way, and said, go to, i pray thee,
let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter
in law.) and she said, what wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come
in unto me?  38:17 and he said, i will send thee a kid from the flock.
and she said, wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?  38:18
and he said, what pledge shall i give thee? and she said, thy signet,
and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. and he gave it
her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.

38:19 and she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and
put on the garments of her widowhood.

38:20 and judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the adullamite,
to receive his pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not.

38:21 then he asked the men of that place, saying, where is the
harlot, that was openly by the way side? and they said, there was no
harlot in this place.

38:22 and he returned to judah, and said, i cannot find her; and also
the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place.

38:23 and judah said, let her take it to her, lest we be shamed:
behold, i sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.

38:24 and it came to pass about three months after, that it was told
judah, saying, tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and
also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. and judah said, bring her
forth, and let her be burnt.

38:25 when she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law,
saying, by the man, whose these are, am i with child: and she said,
discern, i pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and
staff.

38:26 and judah acknowledged them, and said, she hath been more
righteous than i; because that i gave her not to shelah my son. and he
knew her again no more.

38:27 and it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold,
twins were in her womb.

38:28 and it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out
his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet
thread, saying, this came out first.

38:29 and it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his
brother came out: and she said, how hast thou broken forth? this
breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called pharez.

38:30 and afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread
upon his hand: and his name was called zarah.

39:1 and joseph was brought down to egypt; and potiphar, an officer of
pharaoh, captain of the guard, an egyptian, bought him of the hands of
the ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.

39:2 and the lord was with joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he
was in the house of his master the egyptian.

39:3 and his master saw that the lord was with him, and that the lord
made all that he did to prosper in his hand.

39:4 and joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he
made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his
hand.

39:5 and it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer
in his house, and over all that he had, that the lord blessed the
egyptian's house for joseph's sake; and the blessing of the lord was
upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.

39:6 and he left all that he had in joseph's hand; and he knew not
ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. and joseph was a goodly
person, and well favoured.

39:7 and it came to pass after these things, that his master's wife
cast her eyes upon joseph; and she said, lie with me.

39:8 but he refused, and said unto his master's wife, behold, my
master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed
all that he hath to my hand; 39:9 there is none greater in this house
than i; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because
thou art his wife: how then can i do this great wickedness, and sin
against god?  39:10 and it came to pass, as she spake to joseph day by
day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.

39:11 and it came to pass about this time, that joseph went into the
house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house
there within.

39:12 and she caught him by his garment, saying, lie with me: and he
left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.

39:13 and it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment
in her hand, and was fled forth, 39:14 that she called unto the men of
her house, and spake unto them, saying, see, he hath brought in an
hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and i
cried with a loud voice: 39:15 and it came to pass, when he heard that
i lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and
fled, and got him out.

39:16 and she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.

39:17 and she spake unto him according to these words, saying, the
hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to
mock me: 39:18 and it came to pass, as i lifted up my voice and cried,
that he left his garment with me, and fled out.

39:19 and it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his
wife, which she spake unto him, saying, after this manner did thy
servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.

39:20 and joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a
place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the
prison.

39:21 but the lord was with joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him
favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.

39:22 and the keeper of the prison committed to joseph's hand all the
prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he
was the doer of it.

39:23 the keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under
his hand; because the lord was with him, and that which he did, the
lord made it to prosper.

40:1 and it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the
king of egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of egypt.

40:2 and pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the
chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.

40:3 and he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard,
into the prison, the place where joseph was bound.

40:4 and the captain of the guard charged joseph with them, and he
served them: and they continued a season in ward.

40:5 and they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one
night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the
butler and the baker of the king of egypt, which were bound in the
prison.

40:6 and joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon
them, and, behold, they were sad.

40:7 and he asked pharaoh's officers that were with him in the ward of
his lord's house, saying, wherefore look ye so sadly to day?  40:8 and
they said unto him, we have dreamed a dream, and there is no
interpreter of it. and joseph said unto them, do not interpretations
belong to god? tell me them, i pray you.

40:9 and the chief butler told his dream to joseph, and said to him,
in my dream, behold, a vine was before me; 40:10 and in the vine were
three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot
forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 40:11 and
pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and i took the grapes, and pressed them
into pharaoh's cup, and i gave the cup into pharaoh's hand.

40:12 and joseph said unto him, this is the interpretation of it: the
three branches are three days: 40:13 yet within three days shall
pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou
shalt deliver pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner
when thou wast his butler.

40:14 but think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew
kindness, i pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto pharaoh,
and bring me out of this house: 40:15 for indeed i was stolen away out
of the land of the hebrews: and here also have i done nothing that
they should put me into the dungeon.

40:16 when the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he
said unto joseph, i also was in my dream, and, behold, i had three
white baskets on my head: 40:17 and in the uppermost basket there was
of all manner of bakemeats for pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out
of the basket upon my head.

40:18 and joseph answered and said, this is the interpretation
thereof: the three baskets are three days: 40:19 yet within three days
shall pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a
tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

40:20 and it came to pass the third day, which was pharaoh's birthday,
that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head
of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.

40:21 and he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and
he gave the cup into pharaoh's hand: 40:22 but he hanged the chief
baker: as joseph had interpreted to them.

40:23 yet did not the chief butler remember joseph, but forgat him.

41:1 and it came to pass at the end of two full years, that pharaoh
dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.

41:2 and, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured
kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.

41:3 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the
river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon
the brink of the river.

41:4 and the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven
well favoured and fat kine. so pharaoh awoke.

41:5 and he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears
of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.

41:6 and, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind
sprung up after them.

41:7 and the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears.
and pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.

41:8 and it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled;
and he sent and called for all the magicians of egypt, and all the
wise men thereof: and pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none
that could interpret them unto pharaoh.

41:9 then spake the chief butler unto pharaoh, saying, i do remember
my faults this day: 41:10 pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put
me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief
baker: 41:11 and we dreamed a dream in one night, i and he; we dreamed
each man according to the interpretation of his dream.

41:12 and there was there with us a young man, an hebrew, servant to
the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us
our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.

41:13 and it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he
restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

41:14 then pharaoh sent and called joseph, and they brought him
hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his
raiment, and came in unto pharaoh.

41:15 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i have dreamed a dream, and there
is none that can interpret it: and i have heard say of thee, that thou
canst understand a dream to interpret it.

41:16 and joseph answered pharaoh, saying, it is not in me: god shall
give pharaoh an answer of peace.

41:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, in my dream, behold, i stood upon
the bank of the river: 41:18 and, behold, there came up out of the
river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a
meadow: 41:19 and, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor
and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as i never saw in all the
land of egypt for badness: 41:20 and the lean and the ill favoured
kine did eat up the first seven fat kine: 41:21 and when they had
eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but
they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. so i awoke.

41:22 and i saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one
stalk, full and good: 41:23 and, behold, seven ears, withered, thin,
and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them: 41:24 and the
thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and i told this unto the
magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.

41:25 and joseph said unto pharaoh, the dream of pharaoh is one: god
hath shewed pharaoh what he is about to do.

41:26 the seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are
seven years: the dream is one.

41:27 and the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them
are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind
shall be seven years of famine.

41:28 this is the thing which i have spoken unto pharaoh: what god is
about to do he sheweth unto pharaoh.

41:29 behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all
the land of egypt: 41:30 and there shall arise after them seven years
of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of egypt;
and the famine shall consume the land; 41:31 and the plenty shall not
be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall
be very grievous.

41:32 and for that the dream was doubled unto pharaoh twice; it is
because the thing is established by god, and god will shortly bring it
to pass.

41:33 now therefore let pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and
set him over the land of egypt.

41:34 let pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land,
and take up the fifth part of the land of egypt in the seven plenteous
years.

41:35 and let them gather all the food of those good years that come,
and lay up corn under the hand of pharaoh, and let them keep food in
the cities.

41:36 and that food shall be for store to the land against the seven
years of famine, which shall be in the land of egypt; that the land
perish not through the famine.

41:37 and the thing was good in the eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes
of all his servants.

41:38 and pharaoh said unto his servants, can we find such a one as
this is, a man in whom the spirit of god is?  41:39 and pharaoh said
unto joseph, forasmuch as god hath shewed thee all this, there is none
so discreet and wise as thou art: 41:40 thou shalt be over my house,
and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the
throne will i be greater than thou.

41:41 and pharaoh said unto joseph, see, i have set thee over all the
land of egypt.

41:42 and pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon
joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a
gold chain about his neck; 41:43 and he made him to ride in the second
chariot which he had; and they cried before him, bow the knee: and he
made him ruler over all the land of egypt.

41:44 and pharaoh said unto joseph, i am pharaoh, and without thee
shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of egypt.

41:45 and pharaoh called joseph's name zaphnathpaaneah; and he gave
him to wife asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on. and
joseph went out over all the land of egypt.

41:46 and joseph was thirty years old when he stood before pharaoh
king of egypt. and joseph went out from the presence of pharaoh, and
went throughout all the land of egypt.

41:47 and in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by
handfuls.

41:48 and he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were
in the land of egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of
the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.

41:49 and joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much,
until he left numbering; for it was without number.

41:50 and unto joseph were born two sons before the years of famine
came, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare unto
him.

41:51 and joseph called the name of the firstborn manasseh: for god,
said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.

41:52 and the name of the second called he ephraim: for god hath
caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.

41:53 and the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of
egypt, were ended.

41:54 and the seven years of dearth began to come, according as joseph
had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of
egypt there was bread.

41:55 and when all the land of egypt was famished, the people cried to
pharaoh for bread: and pharaoh said unto all the egyptians, go unto
joseph; what he saith to you, do.

41:56 and the famine was over all the face of the earth: and joseph
opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the egyptians; and the
famine waxed sore in the land of egypt.

41:57 and all countries came into egypt to joseph for to buy corn;
because that the famine was so sore in all lands.

42:1 now when jacob saw that there was corn in egypt, jacob said unto
his sons, why do ye look one upon another?  42:2 and he said, behold,
i have heard that there is corn in egypt: get you down thither, and
buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

42:3 and joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in egypt.

42:4 but benjamin, joseph's brother, jacob sent not with his brethren;
for he said, lest peradventure mischief befall him.

42:5 and the sons of israel came to buy corn among those that came:
for the famine was in the land of canaan.

42:6 and joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that
sold to all the people of the land: and joseph's brethren came, and
bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.

42:7 and joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself
strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them,
whence come ye? and they said, from the land of canaan to buy food.

42:8 and joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.

42:9 and joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and
said unto them, ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are
come.

42:10 and they said unto him, nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy
servants come.

42:11 we are all one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no
spies.

42:12 and he said unto them, nay, but to see the nakedness of the land
ye are come.

42:13 and they said, thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one
man in the land of canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with
our father, and one is not.

42:14 and joseph said unto them, that is it that i spake unto you,
saying, ye are spies: 42:15 hereby ye shall be proved: by the life of
pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come
hither.

42:16 send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be
kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any
truth in you: or else by the life of pharaoh surely ye are spies.

42:17 and he put them all together into ward three days.

42:18 and joseph said unto them the third day, this do, and live; for
i fear god: 42:19 if ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound
in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your
houses: 42:20 but bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your
words be verified, and ye shall not die. and they did so.

42:21 and they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought
us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.

42:22 and reuben answered them, saying, spake i not unto you, saying,
do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore,
behold, also his blood is required.

42:23 and they knew not that joseph understood them; for he spake unto
them by an interpreter.

42:24 and he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to
them again, and communed with them, and took from them simeon, and
bound him before their eyes.

42:25 then joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to
restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision
for the way: and thus did he unto them.

42:26 and they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.

42:27 and as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in
the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth.

42:28 and he said unto his brethren, my money is restored; and, lo, it
is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid,
saying one to another, what is this that god hath done unto us?  42:29
and they came unto jacob their father unto the land of canaan, and
told him all that befell unto them; saying, 42:30 the man, who is the
lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the
country.

42:31 and we said unto him, we are true men; we are no spies: 42:32 we
be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest
is this day with our father in the land of canaan.

42:33 and the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, hereby shall
i know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me,
and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone: 42:34
and bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall i know that ye are
no spies, but that ye are true men: so will i deliver you your
brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.

42:35 and it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold,
every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and
their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

42:36 and jacob their father said unto them, me have ye bereaved of my
children: joseph is not, and simeon is not, and ye will take benjamin
away: all these things are against me.

42:37 and reuben spake unto his father, saying, slay my two sons, if i
bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and i will bring him
to thee again.

42:38 and he said, my son shall not go down with you; for his brother
is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in
the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to
the grave.

43:1 and the famine was sore in the land.

43:2 and it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they
had brought out of egypt, their father said unto them, go again, buy
us a little food.

43:3 and judah spake unto him, saying, the man did solemnly protest
unto us, saying, ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with
you.

43:4 if thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy
thee food: 43:5 but if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down:
for the man said unto us, ye shall not see my face, except your
brother be with you.

43:6 and israel said, wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell
the man whether ye had yet a brother?  43:7 and they said, the man
asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, is your
father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according
to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would
say, bring your brother down?  43:8 and judah said unto israel his
father, send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may
live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.

43:9 i will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if i
bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the
blame for ever: 43:10 for except we had lingered, surely now we had
returned this second time.

43:11 and their father israel said unto them, if it must be so now, do
this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry
down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and
myrrh, nuts, and almonds: 43:12 and take double money in your hand;
and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry
it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight: 43:13 take
also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 43:14 and god
almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your
other brother, and benjamin. if i be bereaved of my children, i am
bereaved.

43:15 and the men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand and benjamin; and rose up, and went down to egypt, and
stood before joseph.

43:16 and when joseph saw benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of
his house, bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these
men shall dine with me at noon.

43:17 and the man did as joseph bade; and the man brought the men into
joseph's house.

43:18 and the men were afraid, because they were brought into joseph's
house; and they said, because of the money that was returned in our
sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion
against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.

43:19 and they came near to the steward of joseph's house, and they
communed with him at the door of the house, 43:20 and said, o sir, we
came indeed down at the first time to buy food: 43:21 and it came to
pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold,
every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full
weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.

43:22 and other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food:
we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.

43:23 and he said, peace be to you, fear not: your god, and the god of
your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: i had your money.
and he brought simeon out unto them.

43:24 and the man brought the men into joseph's house, and gave them
water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.

43:25 and they made ready the present against joseph came at noon: for
they heard that they should eat bread there.

43:26 and when joseph came home, they brought him the present which
was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the
earth.

43:27 and he asked them of their welfare, and said, is your father
well, the old man of whom ye spake? is he yet alive?  43:28 and they
answered, thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive.
and they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.

43:29 and he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake
unto me? and he said, god be gracious unto thee, my son.

43:30 and joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his
brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber,
and wept there.

43:31 and he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and
said, set on bread.

43:32 and they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves,
and for the egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because
the egyptians might not eat bread with the hebrews; for that is an
abomination unto the egyptians.

43:33 and they sat before him, the firstborn according to his
birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men
marvelled one at another.

43:34 and he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but
benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of their's. and they
drank, and were merry with him.

44:1 and he commanded the steward of his house, saying, fill the men's
sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money
in his sack's mouth.

44:2 and put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the
youngest, and his corn money. and he did according to the word that
joseph had spoken.

44:3 as soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they
and their asses.

44:4 and when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off,
joseph said unto his steward, up, follow after the men; and when thou
dost overtake them, say unto them, wherefore have ye rewarded evil for
good?  44:5 is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

44:6 and he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.

44:7 and they said unto him, wherefore saith my lord these words? god
forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing: 44:8
behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought
again unto thee out of the land of canaan: how then should we steal
out of thy lord's house silver or gold?  44:9 with whomsoever of thy
servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord's
bondmen.

44:10 and he said, now also let it be according unto your words: he
with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.

44:11 then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground,
and opened every man his sack.

44:12 and he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the
youngest: and the cup was found in benjamin's sack.

44:13 then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and
returned to the city.

44:14 and judah and his brethren came to joseph's house; for he was
yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.

44:15 and joseph said unto them, what deed is this that ye have done?
wot ye not that such a man as i can certainly divine?  44:16 and judah
said, what shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak?  or how
shall we clear ourselves? god hath found out the iniquity of thy
servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with
whom the cup is found.

44:17 and he said, god forbid that i should do so: but the man in
whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you,
get you up in peace unto your father.

44:18 then judah came near unto him, and said, oh my lord, let thy
servant, i pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not
thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as pharaoh.

44:19 my lord asked his servants, saying, have ye a father, or a
brother?  44:20 and we said unto my lord, we have a father, an old
man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is
dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.

44:21 and thou saidst unto thy servants, bring him down unto me, that
i may set mine eyes upon him.

44:22 and we said unto my lord, the lad cannot leave his father: for
if he should leave his father, his father would die.

44:23 and thou saidst unto thy servants, except your youngest brother
come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.

44:24 and it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father,
we told him the words of my lord.

44:25 and our father said, go again, and buy us a little food.

44:26 and we said, we cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with
us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man's face, except
our youngest brother be with us.

44:27 and thy servant my father said unto us, ye know that my wife
bare me two sons: 44:28 and the one went out from me, and i said,
surely he is torn in pieces; and i saw him not since: 44:29 and if ye
take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down
my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

44:30 now therefore when i come to thy servant my father, and the lad
be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad's life;
44:31 it shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with
us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs
of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.

44:32 for thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father,
saying, if i bring him not unto thee, then i shall bear the blame to
my father for ever.

44:33 now therefore, i pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the
lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.

44:34 for how shall i go up to my father, and the lad be not with me?
lest peradventure i see the evil that shall come on my father.

45:1 then joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood
by him; and he cried, cause every man to go out from me. and there
stood no man with him, while joseph made himself known unto his
brethren.

45:2 and he wept aloud: and the egyptians and the house of pharaoh
heard.

45:3 and joseph said unto his brethren, i am joseph; doth my father
yet live? and his brethren could not answer him; for they were
troubled at his presence.

45:4 and joseph said unto his brethren, come near to me, i pray you.
and they came near. and he said, i am joseph your brother, whom ye
sold into egypt.

45:5 now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye
sold me hither: for god did send me before you to preserve life.

45:6 for these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet
there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor
harvest.

45:7 and god sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the
earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.

45:8 so now it was not you that sent me hither, but god: and he hath
made me a father to pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler
throughout all the land of egypt.

45:9 haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, thus saith
thy son joseph, god hath made me lord of all egypt: come down unto me,
tarry not: 45:10 and thou shalt dwell in the land of goshen, and thou
shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's
children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast: 45:11
and there will i nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine;
lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.

45:12 and, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother benjamin,
that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.

45:13 and ye shall tell my father of all my glory in egypt, and of all
that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

45:14 and he fell upon his brother benjamin's neck, and wept; and
benjamin wept upon his neck.

45:15 moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and
after that his brethren talked with him.

45:16 and the fame thereof was heard in pharaoh's house, saying,
joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased pharaoh well, and his
servants.

45:17 and pharaoh said unto joseph, say unto thy brethren, this do ye;
lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of canaan; 45:18 and
take your father and your households, and come unto me: and i will
give you the good of the land of egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of
the land.

45:19 now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the
land of egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your
father, and come.

45:20 also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of
egypt is your's.

45:21 and the children of israel did so: and joseph gave them wagons,
according to the commandment of pharaoh, and gave them provision for
the way.

45:22 to all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to
benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of
raiment.

45:23 and to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden
with the good things of egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and
bread and meat for his father by the way.

45:24 so he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said
unto them, see that ye fall not out by the way.

45:25 and they went up out of egypt, and came into the land of canaan
unto jacob their father, 45:26 and told him, saying, joseph is yet
alive, and he is governor over all the land of egypt. and jacob's
heart fainted, for he believed them not.

45:27 and they told him all the words of joseph, which he had said
unto them: and when he saw the wagons which joseph had sent to carry
him, the spirit of jacob their father revived: 45:28 and israel said,
it is enough; joseph my son is yet alive: i will go and see him before
i die.

46:1 and israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
beersheba, and offered sacrifices unto the god of his father isaac.

46:2 and god spake unto israel in the visions of the night, and said,
jacob, jacob. and he said, here am i.

46:3 and he said, i am god, the god of thy father: fear not to go down
into egypt; for i will there make of thee a great nation: 46:4 i will
go down with thee into egypt; and i will also surely bring thee up
again: and joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.

46:5 and jacob rose up from beersheba: and the sons of israel carried
jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the
wagons which pharaoh had sent to carry him.

46:6 and they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of canaan, and came into egypt, jacob, and all his
seed with him: 46:7 his sons, and his sons' sons with him, his
daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with
him into egypt.

46:8 and these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt, jacob and his sons: reuben, jacob's firstborn.

46:9 and the sons of reuben; hanoch, and phallu, and hezron, and
carmi.

46:10 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman.

46:11 and the sons of levi; gershon, kohath, and merari.

46:12 and the sons of judah; er, and onan, and shelah, and pharez, and
zarah: but er and onan died in the land of canaan. and the sons of
pharez were hezron and hamul.

46:13 and the sons of issachar; tola, and phuvah, and job, and
shimron.

46:14 and the sons of zebulun; sered, and elon, and jahleel.

46:15 these be the sons of leah, which she bare unto jacob in
padanaram, with his daughter dinah: all the souls of his sons and his
daughters were thirty and three.

46:16 and the sons of gad; ziphion, and haggi, shuni, and ezbon, eri,
and arodi, and areli.

46:17 and the sons of asher; jimnah, and ishuah, and isui, and beriah,
and serah their sister: and the sons of beriah; heber, and malchiel.

46:18 these are the sons of zilpah, whom laban gave to leah his
daughter, and these she bare unto jacob, even sixteen souls.

46:19 the sons of rachel jacob's wife; joseph, and benjamin.

46:20 and unto joseph in the land of egypt were born manasseh and
ephraim, which asenath the daughter of potipherah priest of on bare
unto him.

46:21 and the sons of benjamin were belah, and becher, and ashbel,
gera, and naaman, ehi, and rosh, muppim, and huppim, and ard.

46:22 these are the sons of rachel, which were born to jacob: all the
souls were fourteen.

46:23 and the sons of dan; hushim.

46:24 and the sons of naphtali; jahzeel, and guni, and jezer, and
shillem.

46:25 these are the sons of bilhah, which laban gave unto rachel his
daughter, and she bare these unto jacob: all the souls were seven.

46:26 all the souls that came with jacob into egypt, which came out of
his loins, besides jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were threescore
and six; 46:27 and the sons of joseph, which were born him in egypt,
were two souls: all the souls of the house of jacob, which came into
egypt, were threescore and ten.

46:28 and he sent judah before him unto joseph, to direct his face
unto goshen; and they came into the land of goshen.

46:29 and joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet israel
his father, to goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on
his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.

46:30 and israel said unto joseph, now let me die, since i have seen
thy face, because thou art yet alive.

46:31 and joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house,
i will go up, and shew pharaoh, and say unto him, my brethren, and my
father's house, which were in the land of canaan, are come unto me;
46:32 and the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed
cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have.

46:33 and it shall come to pass, when pharaoh shall call you, and
shall say, what is your occupation?  46:34 that ye shall say, thy
servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now,
both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of
goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the egyptians.

47:1 then joseph came and told pharaoh, and said, my father and my
brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have,
are come out of the land of canaan; and, behold, they are in the land
of goshen.

47:2 and he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented
them unto pharaoh.

47:3 and pharaoh said unto his brethren, what is your occupation? and
they said unto pharaoh, thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also
our fathers.

47:4 they said morever unto pharaoh, for to sojourn in the land are we
come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the
famine is sore in the land of canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let
thy servants dwell in the land of goshen.

47:5 and pharaoh spake unto joseph, saying, thy father and thy
brethren are come unto thee: 47:6 the land of egypt is before thee; in
the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the
land of goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity
among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

47:7 and joseph brought in jacob his father, and set him before
pharaoh: and jacob blessed pharaoh.

47:8 and pharaoh said unto jacob, how old art thou?  47:9 and jacob
said unto pharaoh, the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an
hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of
my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the
life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.

47:10 and jacob blessed pharaoh, and went out from before pharaoh.

47:11 and joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a
possession in the land of egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
of rameses, as pharaoh had commanded.

47:12 and joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his
father's household, with bread, according to their families.

47:13 and there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very
sore, so that the land of egypt and all the land of canaan fainted by
reason of the famine.

47:14 and joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land
of egypt, and in the land of canaan, for the corn which they bought:
and joseph brought the money into pharaoh's house.

47:15 and when money failed in the land of egypt, and in the land of
canaan, all the egyptians came unto joseph, and said, give us bread:
for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.

47:16 and joseph said, give your cattle; and i will give you for your
cattle, if money fail.

47:17 and they brought their cattle unto joseph: and joseph gave them
bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle
of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all
their cattle for that year.

47:18 when that year was ended, they came unto him the second year,
and said unto him, we will not hide it from my lord, how that our
money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not
ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
47:19 wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land?
buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants
unto pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that
the land be not desolate.

47:20 and joseph bought all the land of egypt for pharaoh; for the
egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over
them: so the land became pharaoh's.

47:21 and as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of
the borders of egypt even to the other end thereof.

47:22 only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had
a portion assigned them of pharaoh, and did eat their portion which
pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.

47:23 then joseph said unto the people, behold, i have bought you this
day and your land for pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall
sow the land.

47:24 and it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give
the fifth part unto pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for
seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households,
and for food for your little ones.

47:25 and they said, thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in
the sight of my lord, and we will be pharaoh's servants.

47:26 and joseph made it a law over the land of egypt unto this day,
that pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the
priests only, which became not pharaoh's.

47:27 and israel dwelt in the land of egypt, in the country of goshen;
and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied
exceedingly.

47:28 and jacob lived in the land of egypt seventeen years: so the
whole age of jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.

47:29 and the time drew nigh that israel must die: and he called his
son joseph, and said unto him, if now i have found grace in thy sight,
put, i pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly
with me; bury me not, i pray thee, in egypt: 47:30 but i will lie with
my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of egypt, and bury me in their
buryingplace. and he said, i will do as thou hast said.

47:31 and he said, swear unto me. and he sware unto him. and israel
bowed himself upon the bed's head.

48:1 and it came to pass after these things, that one told joseph,
behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons,
manasseh and ephraim.

48:2 and one told jacob, and said, behold, thy son joseph cometh unto
thee: and israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.

48:3 and jacob said unto joseph, god almighty appeared unto me at luz
in the land of canaan, and blessed me, 48:4 and said unto me, behold,
i will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and i will make of thee
a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee
for an everlasting possession.

48:5 and now thy two sons, ephraim and manasseh, which were born unto
thee in the land of egypt before i came unto thee into egypt, are
mine; as reuben and simeon, they shall be mine.

48:6 and thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine,
and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their
inheritance.

48:7 and as for me, when i came from padan, rachel died by me in the
land of canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come
unto ephrath: and i buried her there in the way of ephrath; the same
is bethlehem.

48:8 and israel beheld joseph's sons, and said, who are these?  48:9
and joseph said unto his father, they are my sons, whom god hath given
me in this place. and he said, bring them, i pray thee, unto me, and i
will bless them.

48:10 now the eyes of israel were dim for age, so that he could not
see.

and he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced
them.

48:11 and israel said unto joseph, i had not thought to see thy face:
and, lo, god hath shewed me also thy seed.

48:12 and joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed
himself with his face to the earth.

48:13 and joseph took them both, ephraim in his right hand toward
israel's left hand, and manasseh in his left hand toward israel's
right hand, and brought them near unto him.

48:14 and israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon
ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon manasseh's
head, guiding his hands wittingly; for manasseh was the firstborn.

48:15 and he blessed joseph, and said, god, before whom my fathers
abraham and isaac did walk, the god which fed me all my life long unto
this day, 48:16 the angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
abraham and isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

48:17 and when joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand,
to remove it from ephraim's head unto manasseh's head.

48:18 and joseph said unto his father, not so, my father: for this is
the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.

48:19 and his father refused, and said, i know it, my son, i know it:
he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly
his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall
become a multitude of nations.

48:20 and he blessed them that day, saying, in thee shall israel
bless, saying, god make thee as ephraim and as manasseh: and he set
ephraim before manasseh.

48:21 and israel said unto joseph, behold, i die: but god shall be
with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.

48:22 moreover i have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which i took out of the hand of the amorite with my sword and with my
bow.

49:1 and jacob called unto his sons, and said, gather yourselves
together, that i may tell you that which shall befall you in the last
days.

49:2 gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of jacob; and
hearken unto israel your father.

49:3 reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my
strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power: 49:4
unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to
thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

49:5 simeon and levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their
habitations.

49:6 o my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly,
mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man,
and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.

49:7 cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it
was cruel: i will divide them in jacob, and scatter them in israel.

49:8 judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall
be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down
before thee.

49:9 judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall
rouse him up?  49:10 the sceptre shall not depart from judah, nor a
lawgiver from between his feet, until shiloh come; and unto him shall
the gathering of the people be.

49:11 binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the
choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the
blood of grapes: 49:12 his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth
white with milk.

49:13 zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for
an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto zidon.

49:14 issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:
49:15 and he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was
pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto
tribute.

49:16 dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of israel.

49:17 dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that
biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.

49:18 i have waited for thy salvation, o lord.

49:19 gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the
last.

49:20 out of asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

49:21 naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

49:22 joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well;
whose branches run over the wall: 49:23 the archers have sorely
grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 49:24 but his bow abode
in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands
of the mighty god of jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of
israel:) 49:25 even by the god of thy father, who shall help thee; and
by the almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and
of the womb: 49:26 the blessings of thy father have prevailed above
the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the
everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of joseph, and on the
crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

49:27 benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour
the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

49:28 all these are the twelve tribes of israel: and this is it that
their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to
his blessing he blessed them.

49:29 and he charged them, and said unto them, i am to be gathered
unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the
field of ephron the hittite, 49:30 in the cave that is in the field of
machpelah, which is before mamre, in the land of canaan, which abraham
bought with the field of ephron the hittite for a possession of a
buryingplace.

49:31 there they buried abraham and sarah his wife; there they buried
isaac and rebekah his wife; and there i buried leah.

49:32 the purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was
from the children of heth.

49:33 and when jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

50:1 and joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and
kissed him.

50:2 and joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his
father: and the physicians embalmed israel.

50:3 and forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the
days of those which are embalmed: and the egyptians mourned for him
threescore and ten days.

50:4 and when the days of his mourning were past, joseph spake unto
the house of pharaoh, saying, if now i have found grace in your eyes,
speak, i pray you, in the ears of pharaoh, saying, 50:5 my father made
me swear, saying, lo, i die: in my grave which i have digged for me in
the land of canaan, there shalt thou bury me. now therefore let me go
up, i pray thee, and bury my father, and i will come again.

50:6 and pharaoh said, go up, and bury thy father, according as he
made thee swear.

50:7 and joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all
the servants of pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders
of the land of egypt, 50:8 and all the house of joseph, and his
brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their
flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of goshen.

50:9 and there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was
a very great company.

50:10 and they came to the threshingfloor of atad, which is beyond
jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation:
and he made a mourning for his father seven days.

50:11 and when the inhabitants of the land, the canaanites, saw the
mourning in the floor of atad, they said, this is a grievous mourning
to the egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called abelmizraim,
which is beyond jordan.

50:12 and his sons did unto him according as he commanded them: 50:13
for his sons carried him into the land of canaan, and buried him in
the cave of the field of machpelah, which abraham bought with the
field for a possession of a buryingplace of ephron the hittite, before
mamre.

50:14 and joseph returned into egypt, he, and his brethren, and all
that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his
father.

50:15 and when joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they
said, joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us
all the evil which we did unto him.

50:16 and they sent a messenger unto joseph, saying, thy father did
command before he died, saying, 50:17 so shall ye say unto joseph,
forgive, i pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin;
for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the
trespass of the servants of the god of thy father. and joseph wept
when they spake unto him.

50:18 and his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and
they said, behold, we be thy servants.

50:19 and joseph said unto them, fear not: for am i in the place of
god?  50:20 but as for you, ye thought evil against me; but god meant
it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people
alive.

50:21 now therefore fear ye not: i will nourish you, and your little
ones.

and he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

50:22 and joseph dwelt in egypt, he, and his father's house: and
joseph lived an hundred and ten years.

50:23 and joseph saw ephraim's children of the third generation: the
children also of machir the son of manasseh were brought up upon
joseph's knees.

50:24 and joseph said unto his brethren, i die: and god will surely
visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware
to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob.

50:25 and joseph took an oath of the children of israel, saying, god
will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

50:26 so joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they
embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in egypt.




the second book of moses:  called exodus


1:1 now these are the names of the children of israel, which came
into egypt; every man and his household came with jacob.

1:2 reuben, simeon, levi, and judah, 1:3 issachar, zebulun, and
benjamin, 1:4 dan, and naphtali, gad, and asher.

1:5 and all the souls that came out of the loins of jacob were seventy
souls: for joseph was in egypt already.

1:6 and joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.

1:7 and the children of israel were fruitful, and increased
abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land
was filled with them.

1:8 now there arose up a new king over egypt, which knew not joseph.

1:9 and he said unto his people, behold, the people of the children of
israel are more and mightier than we: 1:10 come on, let us deal wisely
with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there
falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight
against us, and so get them up out of the land.

1:11 therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with
their burdens. and they built for pharaoh treasure cities, pithom and
raamses.

1:12 but the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and
grew.

and they were grieved because of the children of israel.

1:13 and the egyptians made the children of israel to serve with
rigour: 1:14 and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in
morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all
their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.

1:15 and the king of egypt spake to the hebrew midwives, of which the
name of the one was shiphrah, and the name of the other puah: 1:16 and
he said, when ye do the office of a midwife to the hebrew women, and
see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but
if it be a daughter, then she shall live.

1:17 but the midwives feared god, and did not as the king of egypt
commanded them, but saved the men children alive.

1:18 and the king of egypt called for the midwives, and said unto
them, why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children
alive?  1:19 and the midwives said unto pharaoh, because the hebrew
women are not as the egyptian women; for they are lively, and are
delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.

1:20 therefore god dealt well with the midwives: and the people
multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

1:21 and it came to pass, because the midwives feared god, that he
made them houses.

1:22 and pharaoh charged all his people, saying, every son that is
born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save
alive.

2:1 and there went a man of the house of levi, and took to wife a
daughter of levi.

2:2 and the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that
he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.

2:3 and when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of
bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child
therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink.

2:4 and his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.

2:5 and the daughter of pharaoh came down to wash herself at the
river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she
saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.

2:6 and when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the
babe wept. and she had compassion on him, and said, this is one of the
hebrews' children.

2:7 then said his sister to pharaoh's daughter, shall i go and call to
thee a nurse of the hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for
thee?  2:8 and pharaoh's daughter said to her, go. and the maid went
and called the child's mother.

2:9 and pharaoh's daughter said unto her, take this child away, and
nurse it for me, and i will give thee thy wages. and the women took
the child, and nursed it.

2:10 and the child grew, and she brought him unto pharaoh's daughter,
and he became her son. and she called his name moses: and she said,
because i drew him out of the water.

2:11 and it came to pass in those days, when moses was grown, that he
went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied
an egyptian smiting an hebrew, one of his brethren.

2:12 and he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there
was no man, he slew the egyptian, and hid him in the sand.

2:13 and when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the
hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong,
wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?  2:14 and he said, who made thee a
prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou
killedst the egyptian? and moses feared, and said, surely this thing
is known.

2:15 now when pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay moses. but
moses fled from the face of pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of midian:
and he sat down by a well.

2:16 now the priest of midian had seven daughters: and they came and
drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.

2:17 and the shepherds came and drove them away: but moses stood up
and helped them, and watered their flock.

2:18 and when they came to reuel their father, he said, how is it that
ye are come so soon to day?  2:19 and they said, an egyptian delivered
us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for
us, and watered the flock.

2:20 and he said unto his daughters, and where is he? why is it that
ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.

2:21 and moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave moses
zipporah his daughter.

2:22 and she bare him a son, and he called his name gershom: for he
said, i have been a stranger in a strange land.

2:23 and it came to pass in process of time, that the king of egypt
died: and the children of israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto god by reason of the bondage.

2:24 and god heard their groaning, and god remembered his covenant
with abraham, with isaac, and with jacob.

2:25 and god looked upon the children of israel, and god had respect
unto them.

3:1 now moses kept the flock of jethro his father in law, the priest
of midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and
came to the mountain of god, even to horeb.

3:2 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out
of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

3:3 and moses said, i will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
why the bush is not burnt.

3:4 and when the lord saw that he turned aside to see, god called unto
him out of the midst of the bush, and said, moses, moses. and he said,
here am i.

3:5 and he said, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy
feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.

3:6 moreover he said, i am the god of thy father, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob. and moses hid his face; for he
was afraid to look upon god.

3:7 and the lord said, i have surely seen the affliction of my people
which are in egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters; for i know their sorrows; 3:8 and i am come down to
deliver them out of the hand of the egyptians, and to bring them up
out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing
with milk and honey; unto the place of the canaanites, and the
hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the hivites, and
the jebusites.

3:9 now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of israel is come
unto me: and i have also seen the oppression wherewith the egyptians
oppress them.

3:10 come now therefore, and i will send thee unto pharaoh, that thou
mayest bring forth my people the children of israel out of egypt.

3:11 and moses said unto god, who am i, that i should go unto pharaoh,
and that i should bring forth the children of israel out of egypt?
3:12 and he said, certainly i will be with thee; and this shall be a
token unto thee, that i have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth
the people out of egypt, ye shall serve god upon this mountain.

3:13 and moses said unto god, behold, when i come unto the children of
israel, and shall say unto them, the god of your fathers hath sent me
unto you; and they shall say to me, what is his name? what shall i say
unto them?  3:14 and god said unto moses, i am that i am: and he said,
thus shalt thou say unto the children of israel, i am hath sent me
unto you.

3:15 and god said moreover unto moses, thus shalt thou say unto the
children of israel, the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham,
the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is
my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.

3:16 go, and gather the elders of israel together, and say unto them,
the lord god of your fathers, the god of abraham, of isaac, and of
jacob, appeared unto me, saying, i have surely visited you, and seen
that which is done to you in egypt: 3:17 and i have said, i will bring
you up out of the affliction of egypt unto the land of the canaanites,
and the hittites, and the amorites, and the perizzites, and the
hivites, and the jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.

3:18 and they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou
and the elders of israel, unto the king of egypt, and ye shall say
unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath met with us: and now let us
go, we beseech thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we
may sacrifice to the lord our god.

3:19 and i am sure that the king of egypt will not let you go, no, not
by a mighty hand.

3:20 and i will stretch out my hand, and smite egypt with all my
wonders which i will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will
let you go.

3:21 and i will give this people favour in the sight of the egyptians:
and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.

3:22 but every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that
sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your
daughters; and ye shall spoil the egyptians.

4:1 and moses answered and said, but, behold, they will not believe
me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, the lord hath not
appeared unto thee.

4:2 and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
said, a rod.

4:3 and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

4:4 and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
rod in his hand: 4:5 that they may believe that the lord god of their
fathers, the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob,
hath appeared unto thee.

4:6 and the lord said furthermore unto him, put now thine hand into
thy bosom. and he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it
out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

4:7 and he said, put thine hand into thy bosom again. and he put his
hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and,
behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

4:8 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the
voice of the latter sign.

4:9 and it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two
signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the
water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which
thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.

4:10 and moses said unto the lord, o my lord, i am not eloquent,
neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but i
am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

4:11 and the lord said unto him, who hath made man's mouth? or who
maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not i the
lord?  4:12 now therefore go, and i will be with thy mouth, and teach
thee what thou shalt say.

4:13 and he said, o my lord, send, i pray thee, by the hand of him
whom thou wilt send.

4:14 and the anger of the lord was kindled against moses, and he said,
is not aaron the levite thy brother? i know that he can speak well.
and also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth
thee, he will be glad in his heart.

4:15 and thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and i
will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye
shall do.

4:16 and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be,
even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him
instead of god.

4:17 and thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt
do signs.

4:18 and moses went and returned to jethro his father in law, and said
unto him, let me go, i pray thee, and return unto my brethren which
are in egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. and jethro said to
moses, go in peace.

4:19 and the lord said unto moses in midian, go, return into egypt:
for all the men are dead which sought thy life.

4:20 and moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass,
and he returned to the land of egypt: and moses took the rod of god in
his hand.

4:21 and the lord said unto moses, when thou goest to return into
egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before pharaoh, which i have
put in thine hand: but i will harden his heart, that he shall not let
the people go.

4:22 and thou shalt say unto pharaoh, thus saith the lord, israel is
my son, even my firstborn: 4:23 and i say unto thee, let my son go,
that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, i will
slay thy son, even thy firstborn.

4:24 and it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the lord met him,
and sought to kill him.

4:25 then zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son, and cast it at his feet, and said, surely a bloody husband art
thou to me.

4:26 so he let him go: then she said, a bloody husband thou art,
because of the circumcision.

4:27 and the lord said to aaron, go into the wilderness to meet moses.
and he went, and met him in the mount of god, and kissed him.

4:28 and moses told aaron all the words of the lord who had sent him,
and all the signs which he had commanded him.

4:29 and moses and aaron went and gathered together all the elders of
the children of israel: 4:30 and aaron spake all the words which the
lord had spoken unto moses, and did the signs in the sight of the
people.

4:31 and the people believed: and when they heard that the lord had
visited the children of israel, and that he had looked upon their
affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.

5:1 and afterward moses and aaron went in, and told pharaoh, thus
saith the lord god of israel, let my people go, that they may hold a
feast unto me in the wilderness.

5:2 and pharaoh said, who is the lord, that i should obey his voice to
let israel go? i know not the lord, neither will i let israel go.

5:3 and they said, the god of the hebrews hath met with us: let us go,
we pray thee, three days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto
the lord our god; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the
sword.

5:4 and the king of egypt said unto them, wherefore do ye, moses and
aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.

5:5 and pharaoh said, behold, the people of the land now are many, and
ye make them rest from their burdens.

5:6 and pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people,
and their officers, saying, 5:7 ye shall no more give the people straw
to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for
themselves.

5:8 and the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye
shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be
idle; therefore they cry, saying, let us go and sacrifice to our god.

5:9 let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour
therein; and let them not regard vain words.

5:10 and the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers,
and they spake to the people, saying, thus saith pharaoh, i will not
give you straw.

5:11 go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your
work shall be diminished.

5:12 so the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of
egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.

5:13 and the taskmasters hasted them, saying, fulfil your works, your
daily tasks, as when there was straw.

5:14 and the officers of the children of israel, which pharaoh's
taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, wherefore
have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to
day, as heretofore?  5:15 then the officers of the children of israel
came and cried unto pharaoh, saying, wherefore dealest thou thus with
thy servants?  5:16 there is no straw given unto thy servants, and
they say to us, make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but
the fault is in thine own people.

5:17 but he said, ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, let us
go and do sacrifice to the lord.

5:18 go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given
you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.

5:19 and the officers of the children of israel did see that they were
in evil case, after it was said, ye shall not minish ought from your
bricks of your daily task.

5:20 and they met moses and aaron, who stood in the way, as they came
forth from pharaoh: 5:21 and they said unto them, the lord look upon
you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the
eyes of pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us.

5:22 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, lord, wherefore hast
thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?
5:23 for since i came to pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done
evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.

6:1 then the lord said unto moses, now shalt thou see what i will do
to pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a
strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.

6:2 and god spake unto moses, and said unto him, i am the lord: 6:3
and i appeared unto abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, by the name
of god almighty, but by my name jehovah was i not known to them.

6:4 and i have also established my covenant with them, to give them
the land of canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were
strangers.

6:5 and i have also heard the groaning of the children of israel, whom
the egyptians keep in bondage; and i have remembered my covenant.

6:6 wherefore say unto the children of israel, i am the lord, and i
will bring you out from under the burdens of the egyptians, and i will
rid you out of their bondage, and i will redeem you with a stretched
out arm, and with great judgments: 6:7 and i will take you to me for a
people, and i will be to you a god: and ye shall know that i am the
lord your god, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the
egyptians.

6:8 and i will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which i did
swear to give it to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob; and i will give
it you for an heritage: i am the lord.

6:9 and moses spake so unto the children of israel: but they hearkened
not unto moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.

6:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:11 go in, speak unto
pharaoh king of egypt, that he let the children of israel go out of
his land.

6:12 and moses spake before the lord, saying, behold, the children of
israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall pharaoh hear me, who
am of uncircumcised lips?  6:13 and the lord spake unto moses and unto
aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of israel, and unto
pharaoh king of egypt, to bring the children of israel out of the land
of egypt.

6:14 these be the heads of their fathers' houses: the sons of reuben
the firstborn of israel; hanoch, and pallu, hezron, and carmi: these
be the families of reuben.

6:15 and the sons of simeon; jemuel, and jamin, and ohad, and jachin,
and zohar, and shaul the son of a canaanitish woman: these are the
families of simeon.

6:16 and these are the names of the sons of levi according to their
generations; gershon, and kohath, and merari: and the years of the
life of levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.

6:17 the sons of gershon; libni, and shimi, according to their
families.

6:18 and the sons of kohath; amram, and izhar, and hebron, and uzziel:
and the years of the life of kohath were an hundred thirty and three
years.

6:19 and the sons of merari; mahali and mushi: these are the families
of levi according to their generations.

6:20 and amram took him jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she
bare him aaron and moses: and the years of the life of amram were an
hundred and thirty and seven years.

6:21 and the sons of izhar; korah, and nepheg, and zichri.

6:22 and the sons of uzziel; mishael, and elzaphan, and zithri.

6:23 and aaron took him elisheba, daughter of amminadab, sister of
naashon, to wife; and she bare him nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and
ithamar.

6:24 and the sons of korah; assir, and elkanah, and abiasaph: these
are the families of the korhites.

6:25 and eleazar aaron's son took him one of the daughters of putiel
to wife; and she bare him phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers
of the levites according to their families.

6:26 these are that aaron and moses, to whom the lord said, bring out
the children of israel from the land of egypt according to their
armies.

6:27 these are they which spake to pharaoh king of egypt, to bring out
the children of israel from egypt: these are that moses and aaron.

6:28 and it came to pass on the day when the lord spake unto moses in
the land of egypt, 6:29 that the lord spake unto moses, saying, i am
the lord: speak thou unto pharaoh king of egypt all that i say unto
thee.

6:30 and moses said before the lord, behold, i am of uncircumcised
lips, and how shall pharaoh hearken unto me?  7:1 and the lord said
unto moses, see, i have made thee a god to pharaoh: and aaron thy
brother shall be thy prophet.

7:2 thou shalt speak all that i command thee: and aaron thy brother
shall speak unto pharaoh, that he send the children of israel out of
his land.

7:3 and i will harden pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my
wonders in the land of egypt.

7:4 but pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that i may lay my hand
upon egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of
israel, out of the land of egypt by great judgments.

7:5 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i stretch
forth mine hand upon egypt, and bring out the children of israel from
among them.

7:6 and moses and aaron did as the lord commanded them, so did they.

7:7 and moses was fourscore years old, and aaron fourscore and three
years old, when they spake unto pharaoh.

7:8 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 7:9 when
pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, shew a miracle for you: then
thou shalt say unto aaron, take thy rod, and cast it before pharaoh,
and it shall become a serpent.

7:10 and moses and aaron went in unto pharaoh, and they did so as the
lord had commanded: and aaron cast down his rod before pharaoh, and
before his servants, and it became a serpent.

7:11 then pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the
magicians of egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments.

7:12 for they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents:
but aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

7:13 and he hardened pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them;
as the lord had said.

7:14 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh's heart is hardened, he
refuseth to let the people go.

7:15 get thee unto pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the
water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and
the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.

7:16 and thou shalt say unto him, the lord god of the hebrews hath
sent me unto thee, saying, let my people go, that they may serve me in
the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.

7:17 thus saith the lord, in this thou shalt know that i am the lord:
behold, i will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters
which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.

7:18 and the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall
stink; and the egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the
river.

7:19 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, take thy rod, and
stretch out thine hand upon the waters of egypt, upon their streams,
upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of
water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood
throughout all the land of egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in
vessels of stone.

7:20 and moses and aaron did so, as the lord commanded; and he lifted
up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight
of pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that
were in the river were turned to blood.

7:21 and the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and
the egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was
blood throughout all the land of egypt.

7:22 and the magicians of egypt did so with their enchantments: and
pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the
lord had said.

7:23 and pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set
his heart to this also.

7:24 and all the egyptians digged round about the river for water to
drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.

7:25 and seven days were fulfilled, after that the lord had smitten
the river.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, go unto pharaoh, and say unto him,
thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:2 and if thou refuse to let them go, behold, i will smite all thy
borders with frogs: 8:3 and the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy
bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:
8:4 and the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and
upon all thy servants.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch forth thine
hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the
ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of egypt.

8:6 and aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of egypt; and the
frogs came up, and covered the land of egypt.

8:7 and the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up
frogs upon the land of egypt.

8:8 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron, and said, intreat the
lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and
i will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the lord.

8:9 and moses said unto pharaoh, glory over me: when shall i intreat
for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the
frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river
only?  8:10 and he said, to morrow. and he said, be it according to
thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the lord
our god.

8:11 and the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and
from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river
only.

8:12 and moses and aaron went out from pharaoh: and moses cried unto
the lord because of the frogs which he had brought against pharaoh.

8:13 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and the frogs
died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.

8:14 and they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.

8:15 but when pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the lord had said.

8:16 and the lord said unto moses, say unto aaron, stretch out thy
rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice
throughout all the land of egypt.

8:17 and they did so; for aaron stretched out his hand with his rod,
and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in
beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of
egypt.

8:18 and the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.

8:19 then the magicians said unto pharaoh, this is the finger of god:
and pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as
the lord had said.

8:20 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and
stand before pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto
him, thus saith the lord, let my people go, that they may serve me.

8:21 else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, i will send
swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people,
and into thy houses: and the houses of the egyptians shall be full of
swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.

8:22 and i will sever in that day the land of goshen, in which my
people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou
mayest know that i am the lord in the midst of the earth.

8:23 and i will put a division between my people and thy people: to
morrow shall this sign be.

8:24 and the lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies
into the house of pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into all
the land of egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of
flies.

8:25 and pharaoh called for moses and for aaron, and said, go ye,
sacrifice to your god in the land.

8:26 and moses said, it is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice
the abomination of the egyptians to the lord our god: lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the egyptians before their eyes, and will
they not stone us?  8:27 we will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the lord our god, as he shall command us.

8:28 and pharaoh said, i will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the
lord your god in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away:
intreat for me.

8:29 and moses said, behold, i go out from thee, and i will intreat
the lord that the swarms of flies may depart from pharaoh, from his
servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not pharaoh deal
deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the
lord.

8:30 and moses went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

8:31 and the lord did according to the word of moses; and he removed
the swarms of flies from pharaoh, from his servants, and from his
people; there remained not one.

8:32 and pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would
he let the people go.

9:1 then the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh, and tell him,
thus saith the lord god of the hebrews, let my people go, that they
may serve me.

9:2 for if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still, 9:3
behold, the hand of the lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field,
upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.

9:4 and the lord shall sever between the cattle of israel and the
cattle of egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the
children's of israel.

9:5 and the lord appointed a set time, saying, to morrow the lord
shall do this thing in the land.

9:6 and the lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of
egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of israel died not one.

9:7 and pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of
the israelites dead. and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, and he did
not let the people go.

9:8 and the lord said unto moses and unto aaron, take to you handfuls
of ashes of the furnace, and let moses sprinkle it toward the heaven
in the sight of pharaoh.

9:9 and it shall become small dust in all the land of egypt, and shall
be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast,
throughout all the land of egypt.

9:10 and they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before pharaoh; and
moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking
forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

9:11 and the magicians could not stand before moses because of the
boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the
egyptians.

9:12 and the lord hardened the heart of pharaoh, and he hearkened not
unto them; as the lord had spoken unto moses.

9:13 and the lord said unto moses, rise up early in the morning, and
stand before pharaoh, and say unto him, thus saith the lord god of the
hebrews, let my people go, that they may serve me.

9:14 for i will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and
upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that
there is none like me in all the earth.

9:15 for now i will stretch out my hand, that i may smite thee and thy
people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.

9:16 and in very deed for this cause have i raised thee up, for to
shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all
the earth.

9:17 as yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt
not let them go?  9:18 behold, to morrow about this time i will cause
it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in egypt since
the foundation thereof even until now.

9:19 send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast
in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the
field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon
them, and they shall die.

9:20 he that feared the word of the lord among the servants of pharaoh
made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses: 9:21 and he
that regarded not the word of the lord left his servants and his
cattle in the field.

9:22 and the lord said unto moses, stretch forth thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of egypt, upon man, and
upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of
egypt.

9:23 and moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the lord
sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the
lord rained hail upon the land of egypt.

9:24 so there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous,
such as there was none like it in all the land of egypt since it
became a nation.

9:25 and the hail smote throughout all the land of egypt all that was
in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the
field, and brake every tree of the field.

9:26 only in the land of goshen, where the children of israel were,
was there no hail.

9:27 and pharaoh sent, and called for moses and aaron, and said unto
them, i have sinned this time: the lord is righteous, and i and my
people are wicked.

9:28 intreat the lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thunderings and hail; and i will let you go, and ye shall stay no
longer.

9:29 and moses said unto him, as soon as i am gone out of the city, i
will spread abroad my hands unto the lord; and the thunder shall
cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how
that the earth is the lord's.

9:30 but as for thee and thy servants, i know that ye will not yet
fear the lord god.

9:31 and the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in
the ear, and the flax was bolled.

9:32 but the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not
grown up.

9:33 and moses went out of the city from pharaoh, and spread abroad
his hands unto the lord: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the
rain was not poured upon the earth.

9:34 and when pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders
were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants.

9:35 and the heart of pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the
children of israel go; as the lord had spoken by moses.

10:1 and the lord said unto moses, go in unto pharaoh: for i have
hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that i might shew
these my signs before him: 10:2 and that thou mayest tell in the ears
of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things i have wrought in egypt,
and my signs which i have done among them; that ye may know how that i
am the lord.

10:3 and moses and aaron came in unto pharaoh, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord god of the hebrews, how long wilt thou refuse to humble
thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.

10:4 else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will
i bring the locusts into thy coast: 10:5 and they shall cover the face
of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall
eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you
from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of
the field: 10:6 and they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all
thy servants, and the houses of all the egyptians; which neither thy
fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they
were upon the earth unto this day. and he turned himself, and went out
from pharaoh.

10:7 and pharaoh's servants said unto him, how long shall this man be
a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the lord their
god: knowest thou not yet that egypt is destroyed?  10:8 and moses and
aaron were brought again unto pharaoh: and he said unto them, go,
serve the lord your god: but who are they that shall go?  10:9 and
moses said, we will go with our young and with our old, with our sons
and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go;
for we must hold a feast unto the lord.

10:10 and he said unto them, let the lord be so with you, as i will
let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.

10:11 not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the lord; for that ye
did desire. and they were driven out from pharaoh's presence.

10:12 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the
land of egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of
egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath
left.

10:13 and moses stretched forth his rod over the land of egypt, and
the lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that
night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.

10:14 and the locust went up over all the land of egypt, and rested in
all the coasts of egypt: very grievous were they; before them there
were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.

10:15 for they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land
was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the
fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any
green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all
the land of egypt.

10:16 then pharaoh called for moses and aaron in haste; and he said, i
have sinned against the lord your god, and against you.

10:17 now therefore forgive, i pray thee, my sin only this once, and
intreat the lord your god, that he may take away from me this death
only.

10:18 and he went out from pharaoh, and intreated the lord.

10:19 and the lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away
the locusts, and cast them into the red sea; there remained not one
locust in all the coasts of egypt.

10:20 but the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let
the children of israel go.

10:21 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand toward
heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of egypt, even
darkness which may be felt.

10:22 and moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was
a thick darkness in all the land of egypt three days: 10:23 they saw
not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but
all the children of israel had light in their dwellings.

10:24 and pharaoh called unto moses, and said, go ye, serve the lord;
only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones
also go with you.

10:25 and moses said, thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt
offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the lord our god.

10:26 our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be
left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the lord our god; and
we know not with what we must serve the lord, until we come thither.

10:27 but the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them
go.

10:28 and pharaoh said unto him, get thee from me, take heed to
thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou
shalt die.

10:29 and moses said, thou hast spoken well, i will see thy face again
no more.

11:1 and the lord said unto moses, yet will i bring one plague more
upon pharaoh, and upon egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence:
when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence
altogether.

11:2 speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of
his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and
jewels of gold.

11:3 and the lord gave the people favour in the sight of the
egyptians.

moreover the man moses was very great in the land of egypt, in the
sight of pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.

11:4 and moses said, thus saith the lord, about midnight will i go out
into the midst of egypt: 11:5 and all the firstborn in the land of
egypt shall die, from the first born of pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the
mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.

11:6 and there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of egypt,
such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.

11:7 but against any of the children of israel shall not a dog move
his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the lord
doth put a difference between the egyptians and israel.

11:8 and all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down
themselves unto me, saying, get thee out, and all the people that
follow thee: and after that i will go out. and he went out from
pharaoh in a great anger.

11:9 and the lord said unto moses, pharaoh shall not hearken unto you;
that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of egypt.

11:10 and moses and aaron did all these wonders before pharaoh: and
the lord hardened pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the
children of israel go out of his land.

12:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in the land of egypt
saying, 12:2 this month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it
shall be the first month of the year to you.

12:3 speak ye unto all the congregation of israel, saying, in the
tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb,
according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 12:4 and
if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour
next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls;
every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.

12:5 your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye
shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: 12:6 and ye shall
keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole
assembly of the congregation of israel shall kill it in the evening.

12:7 and they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side
posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat
it.

12:8 and they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and
unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.

12:9 eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with
fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.

12:10 and ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and
that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.

12:11 and thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on
your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste:
it is the lord's passover.

12:12 for i will pass through the land of egypt this night, and will
smite all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both man and beast; and
against all the gods of egypt i will execute judgment: i am the lord.

12:13 and the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where
ye are: and when i see the blood, i will pass over you, and the plague
shall not be upon you to destroy you, when i smite the land of egypt.

12:14 and this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep
it a feast to the lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a
feast by an ordinance for ever.

12:15 seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye
shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth
leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul
shall be cut off from israel.

12:16 and in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in
the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner
of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat,
that only may be done of you.

12:17 and ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this
selfsame day have i brought your armies out of the land of egypt:
therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an
ordinance for ever.

12:18 in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even,
ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the
month at even.

12:19 seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for
whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut
off from the congregation of israel, whether he be a stranger, or born
in the land.

12:20 ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye
eat unleavened bread.

12:21 then moses called for all the elders of israel, and said unto
them, draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and
kill the passover.

12:22 and ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood
that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts
with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at
the door of his house until the morning.

12:23 for the lord will pass through to smite the egyptians; and when
he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the
lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to
come in unto your houses to smite you.

12:24 and ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to
thy sons for ever.

12:25 and it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the
lord will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep
this service.

12:26 and it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto
you, what mean ye by this service?  12:27 that ye shall say, it is the
sacrifice of the lord's passover, who passed over the houses of the
children of israel in egypt, when he smote the egyptians, and
delivered our houses. and the people bowed the head and worshipped.

12:28 and the children of israel went away, and did as the lord had
commanded moses and aaron, so did they.

12:29 and it came to pass, that at midnight the lord smote all the
firstborn in the land of egypt, from the firstborn of pharaoh that sat
on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the
dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.

12:30 and pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and
all the egyptians; and there was a great cry in egypt; for there was
not a house where there was not one dead.

12:31 and he called for moses and aaron by night, and said, rise up,
and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of
israel; and go, serve the lord, as ye have said.

12:32 also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be
gone; and bless me also.

12:33 and the egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might
send them out of the land in haste; for they said, we be all dead men.

12:34 and the people took their dough before it was leavened, their
kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.

12:35 and the children of israel did according to the word of moses;
and they borrowed of the egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of
gold, and raiment: 12:36 and the lord gave the people favour in the
sight of the egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as
they required. and they spoiled the egyptians.

12:37 and the children of israel journeyed from rameses to succoth,
about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.

12:38 and a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and
herds, even very much cattle.

12:39 and they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought
forth out of egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust
out of egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for
themselves any victual.

12:40 now the sojourning of the children of israel, who dwelt in
egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

12:41 and it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty
years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of
the lord went out from the land of egypt.

12:42 it is a night to be much observed unto the lord for bringing
them out from the land of egypt: this is that night of the lord to be
observed of all the children of israel in their generations.

12:43 and the lord said unto moses and aaron, this is the ordinance of
the passover: there shall no stranger eat thereof: 12:44 but every
man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised
him, then shall he eat thereof.

12:45 a foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.

12:46 in one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought
of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone
thereof.

12:47 all the congregation of israel shall keep it.

12:48 and when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the
passover to the lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let
him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the
land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

12:49 one law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among you.

12:50 thus did all the children of israel; as the lord commanded moses
and aaron, so did they.

12:51 and it came to pass the selfsame day, that the lord did bring
the children of israel out of the land of egypt by their armies.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 sanctify unto me all
the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of
israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.

13:3 and moses said unto the people, remember this day, in which ye
came out from egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of
hand the lord brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened
bread be eaten.

13:4 this day came ye out in the month abib.

13:5 and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land of
the canaanites, and the hittites, and the amorites, and the hivites,
and the jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a
land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in
this month.

13:6 seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh
day shall be a feast to the lord.

13:7 unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no
leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen
with thee in all thy quarters.

13:8 and thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, this is done
because of that which the lord did unto me when i came forth out of
egypt.

13:9 and it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a
memorial between thine eyes, that the lord's law may be in thy mouth:
for with a strong hand hath the lord brought thee out of egypt.

13:10 thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year
to year.

13:11 and it shall be when the lord shall bring thee into the land of
the canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall
give it thee, 13:12 that thou shalt set apart unto the lord all that
openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which
thou hast; the males shall be the lord's.

13:13 and every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and
if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all
the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.

13:14 and it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come,
saying, what is this? that thou shalt say unto him, by strength of
hand the lord brought us out from egypt, from the house of bondage:
13:15 and it came to pass, when pharaoh would hardly let us go, that
the lord slew all the firstborn in the land of egypt, both the
firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore i sacrifice to
the lord all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the
firstborn of my children i redeem.

13:16 and it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets
between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the lord brought us forth
out of egypt.

13:17 and it came to pass, when pharaoh had let the people go, that
god led them not through the way of the land of the philistines,
although that was near; for god said, lest peradventure the people
repent when they see war, and they return to egypt: 13:18 but god led
the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the red sea:
and the children of israel went up harnessed out of the land of egypt.

13:19 and moses took the bones of joseph with him: for he had straitly
sworn the children of israel, saying, god will surely visit you; and
ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.

13:20 and they took their journey from succoth, and encamped in etham,
in the edge of the wilderness.

13:21 and the lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to
lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them
light; to go by day and night: 13:22 he took not away the pillar of
the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the
people.

14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 speak unto the
children of israel, that they turn and encamp before pihahiroth,
between migdol and the sea, over against baalzephon: before it shall
ye encamp by the sea.

14:3 for pharaoh will say of the children of israel, they are
entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.

14:4 and i will harden pharaoh's heart, that he shall follow after
them; and i will be honoured upon pharaoh, and upon all his host; that
the egyptians may know that i am the lord. and they did so.

14:5 and it was told the king of egypt that the people fled: and the
heart of pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people,
and they said, why have we done this, that we have let israel go from
serving us?  14:6 and he made ready his chariot, and took his people
with him: 14:7 and he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the
chariots of egypt, and captains over every one of them.

14:8 and the lord hardened the heart of pharaoh king of egypt, and he
pursued after the children of israel: and the children of israel went
out with an high hand.

14:9 but the egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots
of pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them
encamping by the sea, beside pihahiroth, before baalzephon.

14:10 and when pharaoh drew nigh, the children of israel lifted up
their eyes, and, behold, the egyptians marched after them; and they
were sore afraid: and the children of israel cried out unto the lord.

14:11 and they said unto moses, because there were no graves in egypt,
hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou
dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of egypt?  14:12 is not this
the word that we did tell thee in egypt, saying, let us alone, that we
may serve the egyptians? for it had been better for us to serve the
egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.

14:13 and moses said unto the people, fear ye not, stand still, and
see the salvation of the lord, which he will shew to you to day: for
the egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever.

14:14 the lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

14:15 and the lord said unto moses, wherefore criest thou unto me?
speak unto the children of israel, that they go forward: 14:16 but
lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and
divide it: and the children of israel shall go on dry ground through
the midst of the sea.

14:17 and i, behold, i will harden the hearts of the egyptians, and
they shall follow them: and i will get me honour upon pharaoh, and
upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.

14:18 and the egyptians shall know that i am the lord, when i have
gotten me honour upon pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his
horsemen.

14:19 and the angel of god, which went before the camp of israel,
removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from
before their face, and stood behind them: 14:20 and it came between
the camp of the egyptians and the camp of israel; and it was a cloud
and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the
one came not near the other all the night.

14:21 and moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the lord
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and
made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

14:22 and the children of israel went into the midst of the sea upon
the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right
hand, and on their left.

14:23 and the egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst
of the sea, even all pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.

14:24 and it came to pass, that in the morning watch the lord looked
unto the host of the egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the
cloud, and troubled the host of the egyptians, 14:25 and took off
their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the
egyptians said, let us flee from the face of israel; for the lord
fighteth for them against the egyptians.

14:26 and the lord said unto moses, stretch out thine hand over the
sea, that the waters may come again upon the egyptians, upon their
chariots, and upon their horsemen.

14:27 and moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea
returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the egyptians
fled against it; and the lord overthrew the egyptians in the midst of
the sea.

14:28 and the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the
horsemen, and all the host of pharaoh that came into the sea after
them; there remained not so much as one of them.

14:29 but the children of israel walked upon dry land in the midst of
the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and
on their left.

14:30 thus the lord saved israel that day out of the hand of the
egyptians; and israel saw the egyptians dead upon the sea shore.

14:31 and israel saw that great work which the lord did upon the
egyptians: and the people feared the lord, and believed the lord, and
his servant moses.

15:1 then sang moses and the children of israel this song unto the
lord, and spake, saying, i will sing unto the lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:2 the lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation:
he is my god, and i will prepare him an habitation; my father's god,
and i will exalt him.

15:3 the lord is a man of war: the lord is his name.

15:4 pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his
chosen captains also are drowned in the red sea.

15:5 the depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a
stone.

15:6 thy right hand, o lord, is become glorious in power: thy right
hand, o lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.

15:7 and in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown
them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which
consumed them as stubble.

15:8 and with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered
together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were
congealed in the heart of the sea.

15:9 the enemy said, i will pursue, i will overtake, i will divide the
spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; i will draw my sword, my
hand shall destroy them.

15:10 thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank
as lead in the mighty waters.

15:11 who is like unto thee, o lord, among the gods? who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?  15:12 thou
stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

15:13 thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast
redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy
habitation.

15:14 the people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on
the inhabitants of palestina.

15:15 then the dukes of edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of moab,
trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of canaan
shall melt away.

15:16 fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine
arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, o
lord, till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.

15:17 thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of
thine inheritance, in the place, o lord, which thou hast made for thee
to dwell in, in the sanctuary, o lord, which thy hands have
established.

15:18 the lord shall reign for ever and ever.

15:19 for the horse of pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his
horsemen into the sea, and the lord brought again the waters of the
sea upon them; but the children of israel went on dry land in the
midst of the sea.

15:20 and miriam the prophetess, the sister of aaron, took a timbrel
in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and
with dances.

15:21 and miriam answered them, sing ye to the lord, for he hath
triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the
sea.

15:22 so moses brought israel from the red sea, and they went out into
the wilderness of shur; and they went three days in the wilderness,
and found no water.

15:23 and when they came to marah, they could not drink of the waters
of marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called
marah.

15:24 and the people murmured against moses, saying, what shall we
drink?  15:25 and he cried unto the lord; and the lord shewed him a
tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made
sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he
proved them, 15:26 and said, if thou wilt diligently hearken to the
voice of the lord thy god, and wilt do that which is right in his
sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his
statutes, i will put none of these diseases upon thee, which i have
brought upon the egyptians: for i am the lord that healeth thee.

15:27 and they came to elim, where were twelve wells of water, and
threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.

16:1 and they took their journey from elim, and all the congregation
of the children of israel came unto the wilderness of sin, which is
between elim and sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after
their departing out of the land of egypt.

16:2 and the whole congregation of the children of israel murmured
against moses and aaron in the wilderness: 16:3 and the children of
israel said unto them, would to god we had died by the hand of the
lord in the land of egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we
did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this
wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.

16:4 then said the lord unto moses, behold, i will rain bread from
heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate
every day, that i may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or
no.

16:5 and it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall
prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as
they gather daily.

16:6 and moses and aaron said unto all the children of israel, at
even, then ye shall know that the lord hath brought you out from the
land of egypt: 16:7 and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of
the lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against the lord: and
what are we, that ye murmur against us?  16:8 and moses said, this
shall be, when the lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat,
and in the morning bread to the full; for that the lord heareth your
murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your
murmurings are not against us, but against the lord.

16:9 and moses spake unto aaron, say unto all the congregation of the
children of israel, come near before the lord: for he hath heard your
murmurings.

16:10 and it came to pass, as aaron spake unto the whole congregation
of the children of israel, that they looked toward the wilderness,
and, behold, the glory of the lord appeared in the cloud.

16:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:12 i have heard the
murmurings of the children of israel: speak unto them, saying, at even
ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread;
and ye shall know that i am the lord your god.

16:13 and it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and
covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.

16:14 and when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of
the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar
frost on the ground.

16:15 and when the children of israel saw it, they said one to
another, it is manna: for they wist not what it was. and moses said
unto them, this is the bread which the lord hath given you to eat.

16:16 this is the thing which the lord hath commanded, gather of it
every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to
the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in
his tents.

16:17 and the children of israel did so, and gathered, some more, some
less.

16:18 and when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much
had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they
gathered every man according to his eating.

16:19 and moses said, let no man leave of it till the morning.

16:20 notwithstanding they hearkened not unto moses; but some of them
left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and moses
was wroth with them.

16:21 and they gathered it every morning, every man according to his
eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.

16:22 and it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice
as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the
congregation came and told moses.

16:23 and he said unto them, this is that which the lord hath said, to
morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the lord: bake that which
ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which
remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.

16:24 and they laid it up till the morning, as moses bade: and it did
not stink, neither was there any worm therein.

16:25 and moses said, eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto
the lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field.

16:26 six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is
the sabbath, in it there shall be none.

16:27 and it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on
the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.

16:28 and the lord said unto moses, how long refuse ye to keep my
commandments and my laws?  16:29 see, for that the lord hath given you
the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place
on the seventh day.

16:30 so the people rested on the seventh day.

16:31 and the house of israel called the name thereof manna: and it
was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers
made with honey.

16:32 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commandeth,
fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see
the bread wherewith i have fed you in the wilderness, when i brought
you forth from the land of egypt.

16:33 and moses said unto aaron, take a pot, and put an omer full of
manna therein, and lay it up before the lord, to be kept for your
generations.

16:34 as the lord commanded moses, so aaron laid it up before the
testimony, to be kept.

16:35 and the children of israel did eat manna forty years, until they
came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the
borders of the land of canaan.

16:36 now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

17:1 and all the congregation of the children of israel journeyed from
the wilderness of sin, after their journeys, according to the
commandment of the lord, and pitched in rephidim: and there was no
water for the people to drink.

17:2 wherefore the people did chide with moses, and said, give us
water that we may drink. and moses said unto them, why chide ye with
me? wherefore do ye tempt the lord?  17:3 and the people thirsted
there for water; and the people murmured against moses, and said,
wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of egypt, to kill
us and our children and our cattle with thirst?  17:4 and moses cried
unto the lord, saying, what shall i do unto this people? they be
almost ready to stone me.

17:5 and the lord said unto moses, go on before the people, and take
with thee of the elders of israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest
the river, take in thine hand, and go.

17:6 behold, i will stand before thee there upon the rock in horeb;
and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it,
that the people may drink. and moses did so in the sight of the elders
of israel.

17:7 and he called the name of the place massah, and meribah, because
of the chiding of the children of israel, and because they tempted the
lord, saying, is the lord among us, or not?  17:8 then came amalek,
and fought with israel in rephidim.

17:9 and moses said unto joshua, choose us out men, and go out, fight
with amalek: to morrow i will stand on the top of the hill with the
rod of god in mine hand.

17:10 so joshua did as moses had said to him, and fought with amalek:
and moses, aaron, and hur went up to the top of the hill.

17:11 and it came to pass, when moses held up his hand, that israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand, amalek prevailed.

17:12 but moses hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it
under him, and he sat thereon; and aaron and hur stayed up his hands,
the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his
hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

17:13 and joshua discomfited amalek and his people with the edge of
the sword.

17:14 and the lord said unto moses, write this for a memorial in a
book, and rehearse it in the ears of joshua: for i will utterly put
out the remembrance of amalek from under heaven.

17:15 and moses built an altar, and called the name of it
jehovahnissi: 17:16 for he said, because the lord hath sworn that the
lord will have war with amalek from generation to generation.

18:1 when jethro, the priest of midian, moses' father in law, heard of
all that god had done for moses, and for israel his people, and that
the lord had brought israel out of egypt; 18:2 then jethro, moses'
father in law, took zipporah, moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
18:3 and her two sons; of which the name of the one was gershom; for
he said, i have been an alien in a strange land: 18:4 and the name of
the other was eliezer; for the god of my father, said he, was mine
help, and delivered me from the sword of pharaoh: 18:5 and jethro,
moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto moses into
the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of god: 18:6 and he
said unto moses, i thy father in law jethro am come unto thee, and thy
wife, and her two sons with her.

18:7 and moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance,
and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they
came into the tent.

18:8 and moses told his father in law all that the lord had done unto
pharaoh and to the egyptians for israel's sake, and all the travail
that had come upon them by the way, and how the lord delivered them.

18:9 and jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the lord had done
to israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the egyptians.

18:10 and jethro said, blessed be the lord, who hath delivered you out
of the hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of pharaoh, who hath
delivered the people from under the hand of the egyptians.

18:11 now i know that the lord is greater than all gods: for in the
thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.

18:12 and jethro, moses' father in law, took a burnt offering and
sacrifices for god: and aaron came, and all the elders of israel, to
eat bread with moses' father in law before god.

18:13 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses sat to judge the
people: and the people stood by moses from the morning unto the
evening.

18:14 and when moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people,
he said, what is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest
thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto
even?  18:15 and moses said unto his father in law, because the people
come unto me to enquire of god: 18:16 when they have a matter, they
come unto me; and i judge between one and another, and i do make them
know the statutes of god, and his laws.

18:17 and moses' father in law said unto him, the thing that thou
doest is not good.

18:18 thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is
with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to
perform it thyself alone.

18:19 hearken now unto my voice, i will give thee counsel, and god
shall be with thee: be thou for the people to god-ward, that thou
mayest bring the causes unto god: 18:20 and thou shalt teach them
ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must
walk, and the work that they must do.

18:21 moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such
as fear god, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over
them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens: 18:22 and let them judge the people at
all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring
unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be
easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

18:23 if thou shalt do this thing, and god command thee so, then thou
shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their
place in peace.

18:24 so moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did
all that he had said.

18:25 and moses chose able men out of all israel, and made them heads
over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of
fifties, and rulers of tens.

18:26 and they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they
brought unto moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

18:27 and moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into
his own land.

19:1 in the third month, when the children of israel were gone forth
out of the land of egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness
of sinai.

19:2 for they were departed from rephidim, and were come to the desert
of sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there israel camped
before the mount.

19:3 and moses went up unto god, and the lord called unto him out of
the mountain, saying, thus shalt thou say to the house of jacob, and
tell the children of israel; 19:4 ye have seen what i did unto the
egyptians, and how i bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto
myself.

19:5 now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all
people: for all the earth is mine: 19:6 and ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.

these are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of
israel.

19:7 and moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid
before their faces all these words which the lord commanded him.

19:8 and all the people answered together, and said, all that the lord
hath spoken we will do. and moses returned the words of the people
unto the lord.

19:9 and the lord said unto moses, lo, i come unto thee in a thick
cloud, that the people may hear when i speak with thee, and believe
thee for ever.

and moses told the words of the people unto the lord.

19:10 and the lord said unto moses, go unto the people, and sanctify
them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes, 19:11 and
be ready against the third day: for the third day the lord will come
down in the sight of all the people upon mount sinai.

19:12 and thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying,
take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch
the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to
death: 19:13 there shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be
stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not
live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.

19:14 and moses went down from the mount unto the people, and
sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

19:15 and he said unto the people, be ready against the third day:
come not at your wives.

19:16 and it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and
the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that
was in the camp trembled.

19:17 and moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with
god; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

19:18 and mount sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the lord
descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

19:19 and when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder
and louder, moses spake, and god answered him by a voice.

19:20 and the lord came down upon mount sinai, on the top of the
mount: and the lord called moses up to the top of the mount; and moses
went up.

19:21 and the lord said unto moses, go down, charge the people, lest
they break through unto the lord to gaze, and many of them perish.

19:22 and let the priests also, which come near to the lord, sanctify
themselves, lest the lord break forth upon them.

19:23 and moses said unto the lord, the people cannot come up to mount
sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, set bounds about the mount, and
sanctify it.

19:24 and the lord said unto him, away, get thee down, and thou shalt
come up, thou, and aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the
people break through to come up unto the lord, lest he break forth
upon them.

19:25 so moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.

20:1 and god spake all these words, saying, 20:2 i am the lord thy
god, which have brought thee out of the land of egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

20:3 thou shalt have no other gods before me.

20:4 thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath,
or that is in the water under the earth.

20:5 thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for i
the lord thy god am a jealous god, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me; 20:6 and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love
me, and keep my commandments.

20:7 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vain; for the
lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

20:8 remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

20:9 six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work: 20:10 but the
seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy god: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor
thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates: 20:11 for in six days the lord made heaven and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the
lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

20:12 honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

20:13 thou shalt not kill.

20:14 thou shalt not commit adultery.

20:15 thou shalt not steal.

20:16 thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

20:17 thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his
ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's.

20:18 and all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and
the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the
people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

20:19 and they said unto moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear:
but let not god speak with us, lest we die.

20:20 and moses said unto the people, fear not: for god is come to
prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin
not.

20:21 and the people stood afar off, and moses drew near unto the
thick darkness where god was.

20:22 and the lord said unto moses, thus thou shalt say unto the
children of israel, ye have seen that i have talked with you from
heaven.

20:23 ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make
unto you gods of gold.

20:24 an altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice
thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and
thine oxen: in all places where i record my name i will come unto
thee, and i will bless thee.

20:25 and if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build
it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast
polluted it.

20:26 neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy
nakedness be not discovered thereon.

21:1 now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.

21:2 if thou buy an hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in
the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

21:3 if he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were
married, then his wife shall go out with him.

21:4 if his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons
or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he
shall go out by himself.

21:5 and if the servant shall plainly say, i love my master, my wife,
and my children; i will not go out free: 21:6 then his master shall
bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or
unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an
aul; and he shall serve him for ever.

21:7 and if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not
go out as the menservants do.

21:8 if she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself,
then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation
he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.

21:9 and if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her
after the manner of daughters.

21:10 if he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty
of marriage, shall he not diminish.

21:11 and if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out
free without money.

21:12 he that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
death.

21:13 and if a man lie not in wait, but god deliver him into his hand;
then i will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.

21:14 but if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him
with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.

21:15 and he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely
put to death.

21:16 and he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found
in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.

21:17 and he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be
put to death.

21:18 and if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone,
or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed: 21:19 if he
rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote
him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall
cause him to be thoroughly healed.

21:20 and if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he
die under his hand; he shall be surely punished.

21:21 notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be
punished: for he is his money.

21:22 if men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit
depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely
punished, according as the woman's husband will lay upon him; and he
shall pay as the judges determine.

21:23 and if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
21:24 eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
21:25 burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

21:26 and if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his
maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.

21:27 and if he smite out his manservant's tooth, or his maidservant's
tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.

21:28 if an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall
be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of
the ox shall be quit.

21:29 but if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and
it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but
that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his
owner also shall be put to death.

21:30 if there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for
the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.

21:31 whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according
to this judgment shall it be done unto him.

21:32 if the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall
give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be
stoned.

21:33 and if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and
not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein; 21:34 the owner of the
pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the
dead beast shall be his.

21:35 and if one man's ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shall
sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also
they shall divide.

21:36 or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past,
and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and
the dead shall be his own.

22:1 if a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it;
he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.

22:2 if a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die,
there shall no blood be shed for him.

22:3 if the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him;
for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall
be sold for his theft.

22:4 if the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be
ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double.

22:5 if a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall
put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; of the best
of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make
restitution.

22:6 if fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of
corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he
that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.

22:7 if a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep,
and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let
him pay double.

22:8 if the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be
brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his
neighbour's goods.

22:9 for all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for
sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another
challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the
judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto
his neighbour.

22:10 if a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a
sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away,
no man seeing it: 22:11 then shall an oath of the lord be between them
both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and
the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.

22:12 and if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the
owner thereof.

22:13 if it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and
he shall not make good that which was torn.

22:14 and if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or
die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it
good.

22:15 but if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good:
if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.

22:16 and if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with
her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.

22:17 if her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay
money according to the dowry of virgins.

22:18 thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

22:19 whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.

22:20 he that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed.

22:21 thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were
strangers in the land of egypt.

22:22 ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.

22:23 if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, i
will surely hear their cry; 22:24 and my wrath shall wax hot, and i
will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

22:25 if thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee,
thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him
usury.

22:26 if thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou
shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 22:27 for that
is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he
sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that i will
hear; for i am gracious.

22:28 thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy
people.

22:29 thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and
of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.

22:30 likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep:
seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give
it me.

22:31 and ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh
that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.

23:1 thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the
wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

23:2 thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou
speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment: 23:3 neither
shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.

23:4 if thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt
surely bring it back to him again.

23:5 if thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his
burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with
him.

23:6 thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.

23:7 keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous
slay thou not: for i will not justify the wicked.

23:8 and thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and
perverteth the words of the righteous.

23:9 also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of
a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of egypt.

23:10 and six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the
fruits thereof: 23:11 but the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and
lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave
the beasts of the field shall eat. in like manner thou shalt deal with
thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.

23:12 six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou
shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy
handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

23:13 and in all things that i have said unto you be circumspect: and
make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out
of thy mouth.

23:14 three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.

23:15 thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat
unleavened bread seven days, as i commanded thee, in the time
appointed of the month abib; for in it thou camest out from egypt: and
none shall appear before me empty:) 23:16 and the feast of harvest,
the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and
the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou
hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.

23:17 three items in the year all thy males shall appear before the
lord god.

23:18 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened
bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.

23:19 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into
the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
mother's milk.

23:20 behold, i send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way,
and to bring thee into the place which i have prepared.

23:21 beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will
not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.

23:22 but if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that i
speak; then i will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary
unto thine adversaries.

23:23 for mine angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the
amorites, and the hittites, and the perizzites, and the canaanites,
the hivites, and the jebusites: and i will cut them off.

23:24 thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do
after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite
break down their images.

23:25 and ye shall serve the lord your god, and he shall bless thy
bread, and thy water; and i will take sickness away from the midst of
thee.

23:26 there shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy
land: the number of thy days i will fulfil.

23:27 i will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people
to whom thou shalt come, and i will make all thine enemies turn their
backs unto thee.

23:28 and i will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the
hivite, the canaanite, and the hittite, from before thee.

23:29 i will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the
land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against
thee.

23:30 by little and little i will drive them out from before thee,
until thou be increased, and inherit the land.

23:31 and i will set thy bounds from the red sea even unto the sea of
the philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for i will
deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt
drive them out before thee.

23:32 thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.

23:33 they shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin
against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare
unto thee.

24:1 and he said unto moses, come up unto the lord, thou, and aaron,
nadab, and abihu, and seventy of the elders of israel; and worship ye
afar off.

24:2 and moses alone shall come near the lord: but they shall not come
nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

24:3 and moses came and told the people all the words of the lord, and
all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and
said, all the words which the lord hath said will we do.

24:4 and moses wrote all the words of the lord, and rose up early in
the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars,
according to the twelve tribes of israel.

24:5 and he sent young men of the children of israel, which offered
burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the lord.

24:6 and moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half
of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

24:7 and he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of
the people: and they said, all that the lord hath said will we do, and
be obedient.

24:8 and moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and
said, behold the blood of the covenant, which the lord hath made with
you concerning all these words.

24:9 then went up moses, and aaron, nadab, and abihu, and seventy of
the elders of israel: 24:10 and they saw the god of israel: and there
was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as
it were the body of heaven in his clearness.

24:11 and upon the nobles of the children of israel he laid not his
hand: also they saw god, and did eat and drink.

24:12 and the lord said unto moses, come up to me into the mount, and
be there: and i will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and
commandments which i have written; that thou mayest teach them.

24:13 and moses rose up, and his minister joshua: and moses went up
into the mount of god.

24:14 and he said unto the elders, tarry ye here for us, until we come
again unto you: and, behold, aaron and hur are with you: if any man
have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

24:15 and moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.

24:16 and the glory of the lord abode upon mount sinai, and the cloud
covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto moses out of
the midst of the cloud.

24:17 and the sight of the glory of the lord was like devouring fire
on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of israel.

24:18 and moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into
the mount: and moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.

25:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:2 speak unto the
children of israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that
giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.

25:3 and this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and
silver, and brass, 25:4 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 25:5 and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 25:6 oil for the light, spices for anointing
oil, and for sweet incense, 25:7 onyx stones, and stones to be set in
the ephod, and in the breastplate.

25:8 and let them make me a sanctuary; that i may dwell among them.

25:9 according to all that i shew thee, after the pattern of the
tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so
shall ye make it.

25:10 and they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a
half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.

25:11 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without
shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round
about.

25:12 and thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in
the four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of
it, and two rings in the other side of it.

25:13 and thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

25:14 and thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the
ark, that the ark may be borne with them.

25:15 the staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be
taken from it.

25:16 and thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which i shall give
thee.

25:17 and thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a
half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof.

25:18 and thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt
thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.

25:19 and make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the
other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the
two ends thereof.

25:20 and the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high,
covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look
one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims
be.

25:21 and thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the
ark thou shalt put the testimony that i shall give thee.

25:22 and there i will meet with thee, and i will commune with thee
from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are
upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which i will give thee in
commandment unto the children of israel.

25:23 thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall
be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit
and a half the height thereof.

25:24 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a
crown of gold round about.

25:25 and thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round
about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round
about.

25:26 and thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings
in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.

25:27 over against the border shall the rings be for places of the
staves to bear the table.

25:28 and thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold, that the table may be borne with them.

25:29 and thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and
covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt
thou make them.

25:30 and thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.

25:31 and thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work
shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls,
his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.

25:32 and six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three
branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of
the candlestick out of the other side: 25:33 three bowls made like
unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls
made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in
the six branches that come out of the candlestick.

25:34 and in the candlesticks shall be four bowls made like unto
almonds, with their knops and their flowers.

25:35 and there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a
knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of
the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the
candlestick.

25:36 their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it
shall be one beaten work of pure gold.

25:37 and thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall
light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it.

25:38 and the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of
pure gold.

25:39 of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these
vessels.

25:40 and look that thou make them after their pattern, which was
shewed thee in the mount.

26:1 moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine
twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of
cunning work shalt thou make them.

26:2 the length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and
the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains
shall have one measure.

26:3 the five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and
other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.

26:4 and thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one
curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou
make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the
second.

26:5 fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops
shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of
the second; that the loops may take hold one of another.

26:6 and thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains
together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.

26:7 and thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon
the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.

26:8 the length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth
of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of
one measure.

26:9 and thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six
curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the
forefront of the tabernacle.

26:10 and thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain
that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the
curtain which coupleth the second.

26:11 and thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches
into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.

26:12 and the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the
half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the
tabernacle.

26:13 and a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of
that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it
shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that
side, to cover it.

26:14 and thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed
red, and a covering above of badgers' skins.

26:15 and thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood
standing up.

26:16 ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a
half shall be the breadth of one board.

26:17 two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against
another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

26:18 and thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards
on the south side southward.

26:19 and thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty
boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two
sockets under another board for his two tenons.

26:20 and for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side
there shall be twenty boards: 26:21 and their forty sockets of silver;
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

26:22 and for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six
boards.

26:23 and two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle
in the two sides.

26:24 and they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be
coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be
for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

26:25 and they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver,
sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under
another board.

26:26 and thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of
the one side of the tabernacle, 26:27 and five bars for the boards of
the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.

26:28 and the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from
end to end.

26:29 and thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their
rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars
with gold.

26:30 and thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion
thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.

26:31 and thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
26:32 and thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood
overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four
sockets of silver.

26:33 and thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou
mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and
the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most
holy.

26:34 and thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony
in the most holy place.

26:35 and thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the
candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle
toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.

26:36 and thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with
needlework.

26:37 and thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim
wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold:
and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.

27:1 and thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long,
and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height
thereof shall be three cubits.

27:2 and thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners
thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it
with brass.

27:3 and thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his
shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the
vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.

27:4 and thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon
the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.

27:5 and thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath,
that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.

27:6 and thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood,
and overlay them with brass.

27:7 and the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall
be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.

27:8 hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in
the mount, so shall they make it.

27:9 and thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south
side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined
linen of an hundred cubits long for one side: 27:10 and the twenty
pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks
of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.

27:11 and likewise for the north side in length there shall be
hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their
twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of
silver.

27:12 and for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be
hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.

27:13 and the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be
fifty cubits.

27:14 the hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits:
their pillars three, and their sockets three.

27:15 and on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their
pillars three, and their sockets three.

27:16 and for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty
cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen,
wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their
sockets four.

27:17 all the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with
silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.

27:18 the length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the
breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined
linen, and their sockets of brass.

27:19 all the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof,
and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of
brass.

27:20 and thou shalt command the children of israel, that they bring
thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn
always.

27:21 in the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is
before the testimony, aaron and his sons shall order it from evening
to morning before the lord: it shall be a statute for ever unto their
generations on the behalf of the children of israel.

28:1 and take thou unto thee aaron thy brother, and his sons with him,
from among the children of israel, that he may minister unto me in the
priest's office, even aaron, nadab and abihu, eleazar and ithamar,
aaron's sons.

28:2 and thou shalt make holy garments for aaron thy brother for glory
and for beauty.

28:3 and thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom i have
filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make aaron's garments
to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's
office.

28:4 and these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate,
and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle:
and they shall make holy garments for aaron thy brother, and his sons,
that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:5 and they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen.

28:6 and they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of
scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.

28:7 it shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two
edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together.

28:8 and the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be
of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

28:9 and thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names
of the children of israel: 28:10 six of their names on one stone, and
the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their
birth.

28:11 with the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a
signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the
children of israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.

28:12 and thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the
ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of israel: and aaron
shall bear their names before the lord upon his two shoulders for a
memorial.

28:13 and thou shalt make ouches of gold; 28:14 and two chains of pure
gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten
the wreathen chains to the ouches.

28:15 and thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning
work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt
thou make it.

28:16 foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length
thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.

28:17 and thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of
stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
this shall be the first row.

28:18 and the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a
diamond.

28:19 and the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

28:20 and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they
shall be set in gold in their inclosings.

28:21 and the stones shall be with the names of the children of
israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a
signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve
tribes.

28:22 and thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of
wreathen work of pure gold.

28:23 and thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and
shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.

28:24 and thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two
rings which are on the ends of the breastplate.

28:25 and the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt
fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the
ephod before it.

28:26 and thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them
upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is
in the side of the ephod inward.

28:27 and two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them
on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof,
over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of
the ephod.

28:28 and they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto
the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the
curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed
from the ephod.

28:29 and aaron shall bear the names of the children of israel in the
breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy
place, for a memorial before the lord continually.

28:30 and thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the urim and
the thummim; and they shall be upon aaron's heart, when he goeth in
before the lord: and aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of
israel upon his heart before the lord continually.

28:31 and thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.

28:32 and there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst
thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of
it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

28:33 and beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and
bells of gold between them round about: 28:34 a golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe
round about.

28:35 and it shall be upon aaron to minister: and his sound shall be
heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the lord, and when
he cometh out, that he die not.

28:36 and thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it,
like the engravings of a signet, holiness to the lord.

28:37 and thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the
mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.

28:38 and it shall be upon aaron's forehead, that aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things, which the children of israel shall hallow
in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead,
that they may be accepted before the lord.

28:39 and thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt
make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of
needlework.

28:40 and for aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make
for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and
for beauty.

28:41 and thou shalt put them upon aaron thy brother, and his sons
with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify
them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

28:42 and thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their
nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: 28:43
and they shall be upon aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in
unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto
the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity,
and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after
him.

29:1 and this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow
them, to minister unto me in the priest's office: take one young
bullock, and two rams without blemish, 29:2 and unleavened bread, and
cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed
with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.

29:3 and thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the
basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

29:4 and aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.

29:5 and thou shalt take the garments, and put upon aaron the coat,
and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and
gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 29:6 and thou shalt put
the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.

29:7 then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his
head, and anoint him.

29:8 and thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.

29:9 and thou shalt gird them with girdles, aaron and his sons, and
put the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a
perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate aaron and his sons.

29:10 and thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the
tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron and his sons shall put their
hands upon the head of the bullock.

29:11 and thou shalt kill the bullock before the lord, by the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

29:12 and thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon
the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside
the bottom of the altar.

29:13 and thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and
the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat
that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

29:14 but the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt
thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.

29:15 thou shalt also take one ram; and aaron and his sons shall put
their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:16 and thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and
sprinkle it round about upon the altar.

29:17 and thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of
him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.

29:18 and thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt
offering unto the lord: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire
unto the lord.

29:19 and thou shalt take the other ram; and aaron and his sons shall
put their hands upon the head of the ram.

29:20 then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it
upon the tip of the right ear of aaron, and upon the tip of the right
ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the
great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar
round about.

29:21 and thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of
the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he
shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

29:22 also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the
two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder;
for it is a ram of consecration: 29:23 and one loaf of bread, and one
cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened
bread that is before the lord: 29:24 and thou shalt put all in the
hands of aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for
a wave offering before the lord.

29:25 and thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon
the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the lord: it
is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

29:26 and thou shalt take the breast of the ram of aaron's
consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the lord: and it
shall be thy part.

29:27 and thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the
shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved
up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for aaron,
and of that which is for his sons: 29:28 and it shall be aaron's and
his sons' by a statute for ever from the children of israel: for it is
an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children
of israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave
offering unto the lord.

29:29 and the holy garments of aaron shall be his sons' after him, to
be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.

29:30 and that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven
days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to
minister in the holy place.

29:31 and thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his
flesh in the holy place.

29:32 and aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the
bread that is in the basket by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

29:33 and they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was
made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat
thereof, because they are holy.

29:34 and if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread,
remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire:
it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.

29:35 and thus shalt thou do unto aaron, and to his sons, according to
all things which i have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou
consecrate them.

29:36 and thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for
atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an
atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.

29:37 seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and
sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth
the altar shall be holy.

29:38 now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two
lambs of the first year day by day continually.

29:39 the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb
thou shalt offer at even: 29:40 and with the one lamb a tenth deal of
flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the
fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.

29:41 and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do
thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according
to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by
fire unto the lord.

29:42 this shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your
generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before
the lord: where i will meet you, to speak there unto thee.

29:43 and there i will meet with the children of israel, and the
tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

29:44 and i will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the
altar: i will sanctify also both aaron and his sons, to minister to me
in the priest's office.

29:45 and i will dwell among the children of israel, and will be their
god.

29:46 and they shall know that i am the lord their god, that brought
them forth out of the land of egypt, that i may dwell among them: i am
the lord their god.

30:1 and thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim
wood shalt thou make it.

30:2 a cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth
thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height
thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same.

30:3 and thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and
the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt
make unto it a crown of gold round about.

30:4 and two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it,
by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make
it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.

30:5 and thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them
with gold.

30:6 and thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the
testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where i
will meet with thee.

30:7 and aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he
dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.

30:8 and when aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense
upon it, a perpetual incense before the lord throughout your
generations.

30:9 ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice,
nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.

30:10 and aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a
year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the
year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it
is most holy unto the lord.

30:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:12 when thou takest
the sum of the children of israel after their number, then shall they
give every man a ransom for his soul unto the lord, when thou
numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou
numberest them.

30:13 this they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are
numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel
is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the lord.

30:14 every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty
years old and above, shall give an offering unto the lord.

30:15 the rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less
than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the lord, to make
an atonement for your souls.

30:16 and thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of
israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of israel
before the lord, to make an atonement for your souls.

30:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:18 thou shalt also
make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and
thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar, and thou shalt put water therein.

30:19 for aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
thereat: 30:20 when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation,
they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near
to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the lord:
30:21 so they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die
not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to
his seed throughout their generations.

30:22 moreover the lord spake unto moses, saying, 30:23 take thou also
unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of
sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and
of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, 30:24 and of cassia
five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil
olive an hin: 30:25 and thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an
ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy
anointing oil.

30:26 and thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation
therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 30:27 and the table and all
his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of
incense, 30:28 and the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels,
and the laver and his foot.

30:29 and thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy:
whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.

30:30 and thou shalt anoint aaron and his sons, and consecrate them,
that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

30:31 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, this
shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.

30:32 upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make
any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it
shall be holy unto you.

30:33 whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of
it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.

30:34 and the lord said unto moses, take unto thee sweet spices,
stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure
frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight: 30:35 and thou
shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary,
tempered together, pure and holy: 30:36 and thou shalt beat some of it
very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of
the congregation, where i will meet with thee: it shall be unto you
most holy.

30:37 and as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make
to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto
thee holy for the lord.

30:38 whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall
even be cut off from his people.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 see, i have called by
name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah:
31:3 and i have filled him with the spirit of god, in wisdom, and in
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
31:4 to devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in
brass, 31:5 and in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of
timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

31:6 and i, behold, i have given with him aholiab, the son of
ahisamach, of the tribe of dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise
hearted i have put wisdom, that they may make all that i have
commanded thee; 31:7 the tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark
of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the
furniture of the tabernacle, 31:8 and the table and his furniture, and
the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
31:9 and the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the
laver and his foot, 31:10 and the cloths of service, and the holy
garments for aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office, 31:11 and the anointing oil, and
sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that i have
commanded thee shall they do.

31:12 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:13 speak thou also
unto the children of israel, saying, verily my sabbaths ye shall keep:
for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that
ye may know that i am the lord that doth sanctify you.

31:14 ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you:
every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever
doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his
people.

31:15 six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of
rest, holy to the lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day,
he shall surely be put to death.

31:16 wherefore the children of israel shall keep the sabbath, to
observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual
covenant.

31:17 it is a sign between me and the children of israel for ever: for
in six days the lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed.

31:18 and he gave unto moses, when he had made an end of communing
with him upon mount sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone,
written with the finger of god.

32:1 and when the people saw that moses delayed to come down out of
the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto aaron, and
said unto him, up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for
this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of egypt, we
wot not what is become of him.

32:2 and aaron said unto them, break off the golden earrings, which
are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters,
and bring them unto me.

32:3 and all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in
their ears, and brought them unto aaron.

32:4 and he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a
graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, these
be thy gods, o israel, which brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:5 and when aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and aaron
made proclamation, and said, to morrow is a feast to the lord.

32:6 and they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt
offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat
and to drink, and rose up to play.

32:7 and the lord said unto moses, go, get thee down; for thy people,
which thou broughtest out of the land of egypt, have corrupted
themselves: 32:8 they have turned aside quickly out of the way which i
commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, these be thy gods, o
israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of egypt.

32:9 and the lord said unto moses, i have seen this people, and,
behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 32:10 now therefore let me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that i may consume them:
and i will make of thee a great nation.

32:11 and moses besought the lord his god, and said, lord, why doth
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth
out of the land of egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?
32:12 wherefore should the egyptians speak, and say, for mischief did
he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them
from the face of the earth? turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people.

32:13 remember abraham, isaac, and israel, thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, i will multiply your
seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that i have spoken of
will i give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.

32:14 and the lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people.

32:15 and moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two
tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on
both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.

32:16 and the tables were the work of god, and the writing was the
writing of god, graven upon the tables.

32:17 and when joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted,
he said unto moses, there is a noise of war in the camp.

32:18 and he said, it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery,
neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the
noise of them that sing do i hear.

32:19 and it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that
he saw the calf, and the dancing: and moses' anger waxed hot, and he
cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

32:20 and he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made
the children of israel drink of it.

32:21 and moses said unto aaron, what did this people unto thee, that
thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?  32:22 and aaron said, let
not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they
are set on mischief.

32:23 for they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us:
for as for this moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

32:24 and i said unto them, whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
off. so they gave it me: then i cast it into the fire, and there came
out this calf.

32:25 and when moses saw that the people were naked; (for aaron had
made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 32:26 then
moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, who is on the lord's
side? let him come unto me. and all the sons of levi gathered
themselves together unto him.

32:27 and he said unto them, thus saith the lord god of israel, put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate
throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, and every man his neighbour.

32:28 and the children of levi did according to the word of moses: and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

32:29 for moses had said, consecrate yourselves today to the lord,
even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow
upon you a blessing this day.

32:30 and it came to pass on the morrow, that moses said unto the
people, ye have sinned a great sin: and now i will go up unto the
lord; peradventure i shall make an atonement for your sin.

32:31 and moses returned unto the lord, and said, oh, this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.

32:32 yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin--; and if not, blot me,
i pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.

32:33 and the lord said unto moses, whosoever hath sinned against me,
him will i blot out of my book.

32:34 therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which i have
spoken unto thee: behold, mine angel shall go before thee:
nevertheless in the day when i visit i will visit their sin upon them.

32:35 and the lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
which aaron made.

33:1 and the lord said unto moses, depart, and go up hence, thou and
the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of egypt, unto
the land which i sware unto abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, saying,
unto thy seed will i give it: 33:2 and i will send an angel before
thee; and i will drive out the canaanite, the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite: 33:3 unto a
land flowing with milk and honey: for i will not go up in the midst of
thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest i consume thee in the
way.

33:4 and when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and
no man did put on him his ornaments.

33:5 for the lord had said unto moses, say unto the children of
israel, ye are a stiffnecked people: i will come up into the midst of
thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy
ornaments from thee, that i may know what to do unto thee.

33:6 and the children of israel stripped themselves of their ornaments
by the mount horeb.

33:7 and moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp,
afar off from the camp, and called it the tabernacle of the
congregation. and it came to pass, that every one which sought the
lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was
without the camp.

33:8 and it came to pass, when moses went out unto the tabernacle,
that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and
looked after moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.

33:9 and it came to pass, as moses entered into the tabernacle, the
cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and
the lord talked with moses.

33:10 and all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle
door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent
door.

33:11 and the lord spake unto moses face to face, as a man speaketh
unto his friend. and he turned again into the camp: but his servant
joshua, the son of nun, a young man, departed not out of the
tabernacle.

33:12 and moses said unto the lord, see, thou sayest unto me, bring up
this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with
me. yet thou hast said, i know thee by name, and thou hast also found
grace in my sight.

33:13 now therefore, i pray thee, if i have found grace in thy sight,
shew me now thy way, that i may know thee, that i may find grace in
thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.

33:14 and he said, my presence shall go with thee, and i will give
thee rest.

33:15 and he said unto him, if thy presence go not with me, carry us
not up hence.

33:16 for wherein shall it be known here that i and thy people have
found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so
shall we be separated, i and thy people, from all the people that are
upon the face of the earth.

33:17 and the lord said unto moses, i will do this thing also that
thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and i know
thee by name.

33:18 and he said, i beseech thee, shew me thy glory.

33:19 and he said, i will make all my goodness pass before thee, and i
will proclaim the name of the lord before thee; and will be gracious
to whom i will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom i will shew
mercy.

33:20 and he said, thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man
see me, and live.

33:21 and the lord said, behold, there is a place by me, and thou
shalt stand upon a rock: 33:22 and it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that i will put thee in a clift of the rock, and
will cover thee with my hand while i pass by: 33:23 and i will take
away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall
not be seen.

34:1 and the lord said unto moses, hew thee two tables of stone like
unto the first: and i will write upon these tables the words that were
in the first tables, which thou brakest.

34:2 and be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto
mount sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.

34:3 and no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen
throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before
that mount.

34:4 and he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and moses
rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount sinai, as the
lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.

34:5 and the lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there,
and proclaimed the name of the lord.

34:6 and the lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the lord, the
lord god, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, 34:7 keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear
the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth
generation.

34:8 and moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and
worshipped.

34:9 and he said, if now i have found grace in thy sight, o lord, let
my lord, i pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and
pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

34:10 and he said, behold, i make a covenant: before all thy people i
will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in
any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work
of the lord: for it is a terrible thing that i will do with thee.

34:11 observe thou that which i command thee this day: behold, i drive
out before thee the amorite, and the canaanite, and the hittite, and
the perizzite, and the hivite, and the jebusite.

34:12 take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in
the midst of thee: 34:13 but ye shall destroy their altars, break
their images, and cut down their groves: 34:14 for thou shalt worship
no other god: for the lord, whose name is jealous, is a jealous god:
34:15 lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and
they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods,
and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice; 34:16 and thou take
of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring
after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.

34:17 thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

34:18 the feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. seven days thou
shalt eat unleavened bread, as i commanded thee, in the time of the
month abib: for in the month abib thou camest out from egypt.

34:19 all that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among
thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.

34:20 but the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and
if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. all the
firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. and none shall appear before
me empty.

34:21 six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt
rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.

34:22 and thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of
wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end.

34:23 thrice in the year shall all your menchildren appear before the
lord god, the god of israel.

34:24 for i will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy
borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up
to appear before the lord thy god thrice in the year.

34:25 thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven;
neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto
the morning.

34:26 the first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto
the house of the lord thy god. thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
mother's milk.

34:27 and the lord said unto moses, write thou these words: for after
the tenor of these words i have made a covenant with thee and with
israel.

34:28 and he was there with the lord forty days and forty nights; he
did neither eat bread, nor drink water. and he wrote upon the tables
the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

34:29 and it came to pass, when moses came down from mount sinai with
the two tables of testimony in moses' hand, when he came down from the
mount, that moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he
talked with him.

34:30 and when aaron and all the children of israel saw moses, behold,
the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.

34:31 and moses called unto them; and aaron and all the rulers of the
congregation returned unto him: and moses talked with them.

34:32 and afterward all the children of israel came nigh: and he gave
them in commandment all that the lord had spoken with him in mount
sinai.

34:33 and till moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his
face.

34:34 but when moses went in before the lord to speak with him, he
took the vail off, until he came out. and he came out, and spake unto
the children of israel that which he was commanded.

34:35 and the children of israel saw the face of moses, that the skin
of moses' face shone: and moses put the vail upon his face again,
until he went in to speak with him.

35:1 and moses gathered all the congregation of the children of israel
together, and said unto them, these are the words which the lord hath
commanded, that ye should do them.

35:2 six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall
be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the lord: whosoever doeth
work therein shall be put to death.

35:3 ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the
sabbath day.

35:4 and moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of
israel, saying, this is the thing which the lord commanded, saying,
35:5 take ye from among you an offering unto the lord: whosoever is of
a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the lord; gold, and
silver, and brass, 35:6 and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
linen, and goats' hair, 35:7 and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood, 35:8 and oil for the light, and spices for
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense, 35:9 and onyx stones, and
stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.

35:10 and every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that
the lord hath commanded; 35:11 the tabernacle, his tent, and his
covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his
sockets, 35:12 the ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat,
and the vail of the covering, 35:13 the table, and his staves, and all
his vessels, and the shewbread, 35:14 the candlestick also for the
light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light,
35:15 and the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil,
and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in
of the tabernacle, 35:16 the altar of burnt offering, with his brasen
grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot, 35:17
the hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the
hanging for the door of the court, 35:18 the pins of the tabernacle,
and the pins of the court, and their cords, 35:19 the cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for aaron
the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's
office.

35:20 and all the congregation of the children of israel departed from
the presence of moses.

35:21 and they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every
one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the lord's offering
to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his
service, and for the holy garments.

35:22 and they came, both men and women, as many as were willing
hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets,
all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of
gold unto the lord.

35:23 and every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins of rams, and
badgers' skins, brought them.

35:24 every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought
the lord's offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood
for any work of the service, brought it.

35:25 and all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their
hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of
purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.

35:26 and all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun
goats' hair.

35:27 and the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for
the ephod, and for the breastplate; 35:28 and spice, and oil for the
light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

35:29 the children of israel brought a willing offering unto the lord,
every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all
manner of work, which the lord had commanded to be made by the hand of
moses.

35:30 and moses said unto the children of israel, see, the lord hath
called by name bezaleel the son of uri, the son of hur, of the tribe
of judah; 35:31 and he hath filled him with the spirit of god, in
wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
workmanship; 35:32 and to devise curious works, to work in gold, and
in silver, and in brass, 35:33 and in the cutting of stones, to set
them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.

35:34 and he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and
aholiab, the son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan.

35:35 them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of
work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the
embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen,
and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that
devise cunning work.

36:1 then wrought bezaleel and aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in
whom the lord put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all
manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that
the lord had commanded.

36:2 and moses called bezaleel and aholiab, and every wise hearted
man, in whose heart the lord had put wisdom, even every one whose
heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it: 36:3 and they
received of moses all the offering, which the children of israel had
brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it
withal. and they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.

36:4 and all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary,
came every man from his work which they made; 36:5 and they spake unto
moses, saying, the people bring much more than enough for the service
of the work, which the lord commanded to make.

36:6 and moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed
throughout the camp, saying, let neither man nor woman make any more
work for the offering of the sanctuary. so the people were restrained
from bringing.

36:7 for the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make
it, and too much.

36:8 and every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of
the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and
purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.

36:9 the length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the
breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.

36:10 and he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other
five curtains he coupled one unto another.

36:11 and he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the
selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of
another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

36:12 fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in
the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the
loops held one curtain to another.

36:13 and he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one
unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle.

36:14 and he made curtains of goats' hair for the tent over the
tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

36:15 the length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was
the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.

36:16 and he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by
themselves.

36:17 and he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain
in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain
which coupleth the second.

36:18 and he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together,
that it might be one.

36:19 and he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and
a covering of badgers' skins above that.

36:20 and he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing
up.

36:21 the length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board
one cubit and a half.

36:22 one board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus
did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.

36:23 and he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the
south side southward: 36:24 and forty sockets of silver he made under
the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and
two sockets under another board for his two tenons.

36:25 and for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the
north corner, he made twenty boards, 36:26 and their forty sockets of
silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another
board.

36:27 and for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.

36:28 and two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the
two sides.

36:29 and they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head
thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.

36:30 and there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen
sockets of silver, under every board two sockets.

36:31 and he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one
side of the tabernacle, 36:32 and five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
tabernacle for the sides westward.

36:33 and he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the
one end to the other.

36:34 and he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of
gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.

36:35 and he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.

36:36 and he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid
them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four
sockets of silver.

36:37 and he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework; 36:38 and
the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their
chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of
brass.

37:1 and bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half
was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a
cubit and a half the height of it: 37:2 and he overlaid it with pure
gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

37:3 and he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four
corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings
upon the other side of it.

37:4 and he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.

37:5 and he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to
bear the ark.

37:6 and he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half
was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

37:7 and he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made
he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat; 37:8 one cherub on the end
on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of
the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.

37:9 and the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered
with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another;
even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.

37:10 and he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length
thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the
height thereof: 37:11 and he overlaid it with pure gold, and made
thereunto a crown of gold round about.

37:12 also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about;
and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.

37:13 and he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon
the four corners that were in the four feet thereof.

37:14 over against the border were the rings, the places for the
staves to bear the table.

37:15 and he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
gold, to bear the table.

37:16 and he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes,
and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure
gold.

37:17 and he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he
the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and
his flowers, were of the same: 37:18 and six branches going out of the
sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side
thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side
thereof: 37:19 three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one
branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in
another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches
going out of the candlestick.

37:20 and in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his
knops, and his flowers: 37:21 and a knop under two branches of the
same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two
branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.

37:22 their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was
one beaten work of pure gold.

37:23 and he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his
snuffdishes, of pure gold.

37:24 of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels
thereof.

37:25 and he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it
was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two
cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.

37:26 and he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the
sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a
crown of gold round about.

37:27 and he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by
the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for
the staves to bear it withal.

37:28 and he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
gold.

37:29 and he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of
sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary.

38:1 and he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five
cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it
was foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.

38:2 and he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the
horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.

38:3 and he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the
shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the
vessels thereof made he of brass.

38:4 and he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the
compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.

38:5 and he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass,
to be places for the staves.

38:6 and he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with
brass.

38:7 and he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar,
to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.

38:8 and he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of
the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

38:9 and he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings
of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits: 38:10 their
pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the
pillars and their fillets were of silver.

38:11 and for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits,
their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the
hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.

38:12 and for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their
pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their
fillets of silver.

38:13 and for the east side eastward fifty cubits.

38:14 the hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits;
their pillars three, and their sockets three.

38:15 and for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that
hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their
sockets three.

38:16 all the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined
linen.

38:17 and the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the
pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their
chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted
with silver.

38:18 and the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty
cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits,
answerable to the hangings of the court.

38:19 and their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four;
their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their
fillets of silver.

38:20 and all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round
about, were of brass.

38:21 this is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of
testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of moses,
for the service of the levites, by the hand of ithamar, son to aaron
the priest.

38:22 and bezaleel the son uri, the son of hur, of the tribe of judah,
made all that the lord commanded moses.

38:23 and with him was aholiab, son of ahisamach, of the tribe of dan,
an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in
purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

38:24 all the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of
the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine
talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary.

38:25 and the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation
was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore
and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 38:26 a bekah
for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the
sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years
old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty men.

38:27 and of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of
the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the
hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

38:28 and of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he
made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted
them.

38:29 and the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two
thousand and four hundred shekels.

38:30 and therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for
it, and all the vessels of the altar, 38:31 and the sockets of the
court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins
of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

39:1 and of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of
service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments
for aaron; as the lord commanded moses.

39:2 and he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen.

39:3 and they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into
wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet,
and in the fine linen, with cunning work.

39:4 they made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the
two edges was it coupled together.

39:5 and the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the
same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the lord commanded moses.

39:6 and they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven,
as signets are graven, with the names of the children of israel.

39:7 and he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should
be stones for a memorial to the children of israel; as the lord
commanded moses.

39:8 and he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the
ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

39:9 it was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was
the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.

39:10 and they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a
sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.

39:11 and the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

39:12 and the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.

39:13 and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were
inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.

39:14 and the stones were according to the names of the children of
israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a
signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.

39:15 and they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of
wreathen work of pure gold.

39:16 and they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put
the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.

39:17 and they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on
the ends of the breastplate.

39:18 and the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the
two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before
it.

39:19 and they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of
the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the
ephod inward.

39:20 and they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two
sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against
the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

39:21 and they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of
the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious
girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from
the ephod; as the lord commanded moses.

39:22 and he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.

39:23 and there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of
an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not
rend.

39:24 and they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

39:25 and they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the
pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the
pomegranates; 39:26 a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the
lord commanded moses.

39:27 and they made coats of fine linen of woven work for aaron, and
for his sons, 39:28 and a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of
fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen, 39:29 and a
girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of
needlework; as the lord commanded moses.

39:30 and they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and
wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, holiness
to the lord.

39:31 and they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon
the mitre; as the lord commanded moses.

39:32 thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation finished: and the children of israel did according to all
that the lord commanded moses, so did they.

39:33 and they brought the tabernacle unto moses, the tent, and all
his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and
his sockets, 39:34 and the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the
covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering, 39:35 the
ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
39:36 the table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread, 39:37
the pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to
be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,
39:38 and the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet
incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door, 39:39 the brasen
altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the
laver and his foot, 39:40 the hangings of the court, his pillars, and
his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his
pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the
tent of the congregation, 39:41 the cloths of service to do service in
the holy place, and the holy garments for aaron the priest, and his
sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.

39:42 according to all that the lord commanded moses, so the children
of israel made all the work.

39:43 and moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done
it as the lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and moses
blessed them.

40:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 40:2 on the first day of
the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.

40:3 and thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover
the ark with the vail.

40:4 and thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things
that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the
candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.

40:5 and thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the
ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the
tabernacle.

40:6 and thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the
door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.

40:7 and thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation
and the altar, and shalt put water therein.

40:8 and thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the
hanging at the court gate.

40:9 and thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle,
and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels
thereof: and it shall be holy.

40:10 and thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all
his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most
holy.

40:11 and thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.

40:12 and thou shalt bring aaron and his sons unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.

40:13 and thou shalt put upon aaron the holy garments, and anoint him,
and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

40:14 and thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 40:15
and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that
they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing
shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their
generations.

40:16 thus did moses: according to all that the lord commanded him, so
did he.

40:17 and it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on
the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.

40:18 and moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets,
and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared
up his pillars.

40:19 and he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the
covering of the tent above upon it; as the lord commanded moses.

40:20 and he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the
staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark: 40:21
and he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the
covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the lord commanded
moses.

40:22 and he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the
side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.

40:23 and he set the bread in order upon it before the lord; as the
lord had commanded moses.

40:24 and he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over
against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.

40:25 and he lighted the lamps before the lord; as the lord commanded
moses.

40:26 and he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation
before the vail: 40:27 and he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the lord
commanded moses.

40:28 and he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.

40:29 and he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the
burnt offering and the meat offering; as the lord commanded moses.

40:30 and he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and
the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.

40:31 and moses and aaron and his sons washed their hands and their
feet thereat: 40:32 when they went into the tent of the congregation,
and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the lord
commanded moses.

40:33 and he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the
altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. so moses finished the
work.

40:34 then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory
of the lord filled the tabernacle.

40:35 and moses was not able to enter into the tent of the
congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the
lord filled the tabernacle.

40:36 and when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the
children of israel went onward in all their journeys: 40:37 but if the
cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it
was taken up.

40:38 for the cloud of the lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and
fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of israel,
throughout all their journeys.




the third book of moses:  called leviticus


1:1 and the lord called unto moses, and spake unto him out of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 1:2 speak unto the children of
israel, and say unto them, if any man of you bring an offering unto
the lord, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the
herd, and of the flock.

1:3 if his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a
male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the lord.

1:4 and he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and
it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.

1:5 and he shall kill the bullock before the lord: and the priests,
aaron's sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round
about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

1:6 and he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.

1:7 and the sons of aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar,
and lay the wood in order upon the fire: 1:8 and the priests, aaron's
sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the
wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 1:9 but his inwards
and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on
the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the lord.

1:10 and if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of
the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without
blemish.

1:11 and he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before
the lord: and the priests, aaron's sons, shall sprinkle his blood
round about upon the altar.

1:12 and he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat:
and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire
which is upon the altar: 1:13 but he shall wash the inwards and the
legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon
the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the lord.

1:14 and if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the lord be of
fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young
pigeons.

1:15 and the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his
head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung
out at the side of the altar: 1:16 and he shall pluck away his crop
with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by
the place of the ashes: 1:17 and he shall cleave it with the wings
thereof, but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it
upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt
sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

2:1 and when any will offer a meat offering unto the lord, his
offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and
put frankincense thereon: 2:2 and he shall bring it to aaron's sons
the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour
thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof;
and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord: 2:3 and the
remnant of the meat offering shall be aaron's and his sons': it is a
thing most holy of the offerings of the lord made by fire.

2:4 and if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the
oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or
unleavened wafers anointed with oil.

2:5 and if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be
of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.

2:6 thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat
offering.

2:7 and if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it
shall be made of fine flour with oil.

2:8 and thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these
things unto the lord: and when it is presented unto the priest, he
shall bring it unto the altar.

2:9 and the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial
thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

2:10 and that which is left of the meat offering shall be aaron's and
his sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the lord made
by fire.

2:11 no meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the lord, shall be
made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any
offering of the lord made by fire.

2:12 as for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto
the lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

2:13 and every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with
salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy god to
be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt
offer salt.

2:14 and if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the
lord, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green
ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.

2:15 and thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it
is a meat offering.

2:16 and the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten
corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense
thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

3:1 and if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer
it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it
without blemish before the lord.

3:2 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill
it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron's sons
the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.

3:3 and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the
inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:4 and the two
kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the
caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:5 and aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt
sacrifice, which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

3:6 and if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the
lord be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without
blemish.

3:7 if he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before
the lord.

3:8 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill
it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and aaron's sons shall
sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar.

3:9 and he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an
offering made by fire unto the lord; the fat thereof, and the whole
rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that
covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 3:10
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the
flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he
take away.

3:11 and the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire unto the lord.

3:12 and if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the
lord.

3:13 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before
the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of aaron shall
sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.

3:14 and he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by
fire unto the lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat
that is upon the inwards, 3:15 and the two kidneys, and the fat that
is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver,
with the kidneys, it shall he take away.

3:16 and the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of
the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the
lord's.

3:17 it shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout
all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.

4:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:2 speak unto the children
of israel, saying, if a soul shall sin through ignorance against any
of the commandments of the lord concerning things which ought not to
be done, and shall do against any of them: 4:3 if the priest that is
anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring
for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish
unto the lord for a sin offering.

4:4 and he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation before the lord; and shall lay his hand upon the
bullock's head, and kill the bullock before the lord.

4:5 and the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock's blood,
and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:6 and the priest
shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven
times before the lord, before the vail of the sanctuary.

4:7 and the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the
altar of sweet incense before the lord, which is in the tabernacle of
the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the
bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

4:8 and he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the
sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that
is upon the inwards, 4:9 and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon
them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the
kidneys, it shall he take away, 4:10 as it was taken off from the
bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall burn
them upon the altar of the burnt offering.

4:11 and the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head,
and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, 4:12 even the whole
bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place,
where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire:
where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.

4:13 and if the whole congregation of israel sin through ignorance,
and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done
somewhat against any of the commandments of the lord concerning things
which should not be done, and are guilty; 4:14 when the sin, which
they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall
offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle
of the congregation.

4:15 and the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the
head of the bullock before the lord: and the bullock shall be killed
before the lord.

4:16 and the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock's
blood to the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:17 and the priest shall
dip his finger in some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven times
before the lord, even before the vail.

4:18 and he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar
which is before the lord, that is in the tabernacle of the
congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the
altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.

4:19 and he shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the
altar.

4:20 and he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a
sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an
atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.

4:21 and he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn
him as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the
congregation.

4:22 when a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance
against any of the commandments of the lord his god concerning things
which should not be done, and is guilty; 4:23 or if his sin, wherein
he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a
kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 4:24 and he shall lay his
hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they
kill the burnt offering before the lord: it is a sin offering.

4:25 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,
and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt
offering.

4:26 and he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the
sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement
for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.

4:27 and if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while
he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the lord
concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty; 4:28 or
if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall
bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for
his sin which he hath sinned.

4:29 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering.

4:30 and the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger,
and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall
pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar.

4:31 and he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken
away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall
burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the lord; and the
priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.

4:32 and if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a
female without blemish.

4:33 and he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and
slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt
offering.

4:34 and the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering,
and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar:
4:35 and he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the
lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the
priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made
by fire unto the lord: and the priest shall make an atonement for his
sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:1 and if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a
witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it,
then he shall bear his iniquity.

5:2 or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of
an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of
unclean creeping things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall
be unclean, and guilty.

5:3 or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it
be that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he
knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.

5:4 or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do
good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it
be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one
of these.

5:5 and it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things,
that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing: 5:6 and he
shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord for his sin which he
hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats,
for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him
concerning his sin.

5:7 and if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his
trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, unto the lord; one for a sin offering, and the other for a
burnt offering.

5:8 and he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that
which is for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his
neck, but shall not divide it asunder: 5:9 and he shall sprinkle of
the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest
of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a
sin offering.

5:10 and he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to
the manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin
which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:11 but if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth
part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil
upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a
sin offering.

5:12 then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take
his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar,
according to the offerings made by fire unto the lord: it is a sin
offering.

5:13 and the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his
sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him:
and the remnant shall be the priest's, as a meat offering.

5:14 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:15 if a soul commit a
trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the lord;
then he shall bring for his trespass unto the lord a ram without
blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.

5:16 and he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the
holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the
priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of
the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:17 and if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are
forbidden to be done by the commandments of the lord; though he wist
it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.

5:18 and he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with
thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance
wherein he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.

5:19 it is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against
the lord.

6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 if a soul sin, and
commit a trespass against the lord, and lie unto his neighbour in that
which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken
away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour; 6:3 or have found
that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in
any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: 6:4 then it shall
be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that
which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully
gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing
which he found, 6:5 or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he
shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part
more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day
of his trespass offering.

6:6 and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord, a ram
without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass
offering, unto the priest: 6:7 and the priest shall make an atonement
for him before the lord: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of
all that he hath done in trespassing therein.

6:8 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:9 command aaron and his
sons, saying, this is the law of the burnt offering: it is the burnt
offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the
morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.

6:10 and the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen
breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the
fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall
put them beside the altar.

6:11 and he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and
carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.

6:12 and the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not
be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and
lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the
fat of the peace offerings.

6:13 the fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go
out.

6:14 and this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of aaron shall
offer it before the lord, before the altar.

6:15 and he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat
offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is
upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet
savour, even the memorial of it, unto the lord.

6:16 and the remainder thereof shall aaron and his sons eat: with
unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of
the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.

6:17 it shall not be baken with leaven. i have given it unto them for
their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the
sin offering, and as the trespass offering.

6:18 all the males among the children of aaron shall eat of it. it
shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the
offerings of the lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall
be holy.

6:19 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:20 this is the offering
of aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the lord in the
day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for
a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof
at night.

6:21 in a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou
shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt
thou offer for a sweet savour unto the lord.

6:22 and the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall
offer it: it is a statute for ever unto the lord; it shall be wholly
burnt.

6:23 for every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it
shall not be eaten.

6:24 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:25 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, saying, this is the law of the sin offering: in the place
where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed
before the lord: it is most holy.

6:26 the priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy
place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

6:27 whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when
there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt
wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place.

6:28 but the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and
if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed
in water.

6:29 all the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it is most
holy.

6:30 and no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the
tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place,
shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.

7:1 likewise this is the law of the trespass offering: it is most
holy.

7:2 in the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill
the trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round
about upon the altar.

7:3 and he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the
fat that covereth the inwards, 7:4 and the two kidneys, and the fat
that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above
the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away: 7:5 and the priest
shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire unto the
lord: it is a trespass offering.

7:6 every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten
in the holy place: it is most holy.

7:7 as the sin offering is, so is the trespass offering: there is one
law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have
it.

7:8 and the priest that offereth any man's burnt offering, even the
priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he
hath offered.

7:9 and all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that
is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest's
that offereth it.

7:10 and every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the
sons of aaron have, one as much as another.

7:11 and this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
shall offer unto the lord.

7:12 if he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the
sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and
unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of
fine flour, fried.

7:13 besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread
with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings.

7:14 and of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an
heave offering unto the lord, and it shall be the priest's that
sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.

7:15 and the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for
thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall
not leave any of it until the morning.

7:16 but if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary
offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his
sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten:
7:17 but the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day
shall be burnt with fire.

7:18 and if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings
be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither
shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an
abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.

7:19 and the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten;
it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean
shall eat thereof.

7:20 but the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace
offerings, that pertain unto the lord, having his uncleanness upon
him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

7:21 moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the
uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean
thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which
pertain unto the lord, even that soul shall be cut off from his
people.

7:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:23 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or
of sheep, or of goat.

7:24 and the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of
that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye
shall in no wise eat of it.

7:25 for whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an
offering made by fire unto the lord, even the soul that eateth it
shall be cut off from his people.

7:26 moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl
or of beast, in any of your dwellings.

7:27 whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that
soul shall be cut off from his people.

7:28 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:29 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, he that offereth the sacrifice of his
peace offerings unto the lord shall bring his oblation unto the lord
of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.

7:30 his own hands shall bring the offerings of the lord made by fire,
the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be
waved for a wave offering before the lord.

7:31 and the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast
shall be aaron's and his sons'.

7:32 and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave
offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.

7:33 he among the sons of aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace
offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.

7:34 for the wave breast and the heave shoulder have i taken of the
children of israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings,
and have given them unto aaron the priest and unto his sons by a
statute for ever from among the children of israel.

7:35 this is the portion of the anointing of aaron, and of the
anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the lord made by fire,
in the day when he presented them to minister unto the lord in the
priest's office; 7:36 which the lord commanded to be given them of the
children of israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for
ever throughout their generations.

7:37 this is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and
of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the
consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings; 7:38 which
the lord commanded moses in mount sinai, in the day that he commanded
the children of israel to offer their oblations unto the lord, in the
wilderness of sinai.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 take aaron and his sons
with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for
the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 8:3
and gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

8:4 and moses did as the lord commanded him; and the assembly was
gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

8:5 and moses said unto the congregation, this is the thing which the
lord commanded to be done.

8:6 and moses brought aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.

8:7 and he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and
clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded
him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him
therewith.

8:8 and he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the
breastplate the urim and the thummim.

8:9 and he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon
his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the
lord commanded moses.

8:10 and moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and
all that was therein, and sanctified them.

8:11 and he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed
the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to
sanctify them.

8:12 and he poured of the anointing oil upon aaron's head, and
anointed him, to sanctify him.

8:13 and moses brought aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and
girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the lord
commanded moses.

8:14 and he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and aaron and
his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin
offering.

8:15 and he slew it; and moses took the blood, and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the
altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified
it, to make reconciliation upon it.

8:16 and he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul
above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and moses burned
it upon the altar.

8:17 but the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt
with fire without the camp; as the lord commanded moses.

8:18 and he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and aaron and his
sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:19 and he killed it; and moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar
round about.

8:20 and he cut the ram into pieces; and moses burnt the head, and the
pieces, and the fat.

8:21 and he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and moses burnt
the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet
savour, and an offering made by fire unto the lord; as the lord
commanded moses.

8:22 and he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and aaron
and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.

8:23 and he slew it; and moses took of the blood of it, and put it
upon the tip of aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right
hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.

8:24 and he brought aaron's sons, and moses put of the blood upon the
tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and
upon the great toes of their right feet: and moses sprinkled the blood
upon the altar round about.

8:25 and he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon
the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and
their fat, and the right shoulder: 8:26 and out of the basket of
unleavened bread, that was before the lord, he took one unleavened
cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the
fat, and upon the right shoulder: 8:27 and he put all upon aaron's
hands, and upon his sons' hands, and waved them for a wave offering
before the lord.

8:28 and moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the
altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet
savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the lord.

8:29 and moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering
before the lord: for of the ram of consecration it was moses' part; as
the lord commanded moses.

8:30 and moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was
upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon aaron, and upon his garments,
and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and
sanctified aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

8:31 and moses said unto aaron and to his sons, boil the flesh at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the
bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as i commanded, saying,
aaron and his sons shall eat it.

8:32 and that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye
burn with fire.

8:33 and ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at
an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

8:34 as he hath done this day, so the lord hath commanded to do, to
make an atonement for you.

8:35 therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the
lord, that ye die not: for so i am commanded.

8:36 so aaron and his sons did all things which the lord commanded by
the hand of moses.

9:1 and it came to pass on the eighth day, that moses called aaron and
his sons, and the elders of israel; 9:2 and he said unto aaron, take
thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering,
without blemish, and offer them before the lord.

9:3 and unto the children of israel thou shalt speak, saying, take ye
a kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of
the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering; 9:4 also a
bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the lord;
and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the lord will appear
unto you.

9:5 and they brought that which moses commanded before the tabernacle
of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood
before the lord.

9:6 and moses said, this is the thing which the lord commanded that ye
should do: and the glory of the lord shall appear unto you.

9:7 and moses said unto aaron, go unto the altar, and offer thy sin
offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself,
and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an
atonement for them; as the lord commanded.

9:8 aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
offering, which was for himself.

9:9 and the sons of aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped
his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and
poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar: 9:10 but the fat, and
the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he
burnt upon the altar; as the lord commanded moses.

9:11 and the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.

9:12 and he slew the burnt offering; and aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.

9:13 and they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces
thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.

9:14 and he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the
burnt offering on the altar.

9:15 and he brought the people's offering, and took the goat, which
was the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for
sin, as the first.

9:16 and he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to
the manner.

9:17 and he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof,
and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the
morning.

9:18 he slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, which was for the people: and aaron's sons presented unto
him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, 9:19 and
the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which
covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:
9:20 and they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon
the altar: 9:21 and the breasts and the right shoulder aaron waved for
a wave offering before the lord; as moses commanded.

9:22 and aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them,
and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt
offering, and peace offerings.

9:23 and moses and aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the people.

9:24 and there came a fire out from before the lord, and consumed upon
the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people
saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

10:1 and nadab and abihu, the sons of aaron, took either of them his
censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered
strange fire before the lord, which he commanded them not.

10:2 and there went out fire from the lord, and devoured them, and
they died before the lord.

10:3 then moses said unto aaron, this is it that the lord spake,
saying, i will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all
the people i will be glorified. and aaron held his peace.

10:4 and moses called mishael and elzaphan, the sons of uzziel the
uncle of aaron, and said unto them, come near, carry your brethren
from before the sanctuary out of the camp.

10:5 so they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the
camp; as moses had said.

10:6 and moses said unto aaron, and unto eleazar and unto ithamar, his
sons, uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die,
and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the
whole house of israel, bewail the burning which the lord hath kindled.

10:7 and ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the lord is upon
you. and they did according to the word of moses.

10:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, saying, 10:9 do not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for
ever throughout your generations: 10:10 and that ye may put difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean; 10:11 and that
ye may teach the children of israel all the statutes which the lord
hath spoken unto them by the hand of moses.

10:12 and moses spake unto aaron, and unto eleazar and unto ithamar,
his sons that were left, take the meat offering that remaineth of the
offerings of the lord made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside
the altar: for it is most holy: 10:13 and ye shall eat it in the holy
place, because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of
the lord made by fire: for so i am commanded.

10:14 and the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be
thy due, and thy sons' due, which are given out of the sacrifices of
peace offerings of the children of israel.

10:15 the heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the
offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering
before the lord; and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, by a
statute for ever; as the lord hath commanded.

10:16 and moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and,
behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with eleazar and ithamar, the
sons of aaron which were left alive, saying, 10:17 wherefore have ye
not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy,
and god hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to
make atonement for them before the lord?  10:18 behold, the blood of
it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have
eaten it in the holy place, as i commanded.

10:19 and aaron said unto moses, behold, this day have they offered
their sin offering and their burnt offering before the lord; and such
things have befallen me: and if i had eaten the sin offering to day,
should it have been accepted in the sight of the lord?  10:20 and when
moses heard that, he was content.

11:1 and the lord spake unto moses and to aaron, saying unto them,
11:2 speak unto the children of israel, saying, these are the beasts
which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.

11:3 whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the
cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

11:4 nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:5 and the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:6 and the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the
hoof; he is unclean unto you.

11:7 and the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted,
yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you.

11:8 of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not
touch; they are unclean to you.

11:9 these shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath
fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them
shall ye eat.

11:10 and all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the
rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which
is in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you: 11:11 they
shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their
flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination.

11:12 whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be
an abomination unto you.

11:13 and these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the
fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle,
and the ossifrage, and the ospray, 11:14 and the vulture, and the kite
after his kind; 11:15 every raven after his kind; 11:16 and the owl,
and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind, 11:17
and the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl, 11:18 and
the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle, 11:19 and the stork,
the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

11:20 all fowls that creep, going upon all four, shall be an
abomination unto you.

11:21 yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth
upon all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon
the earth; 11:22 even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his
kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his
kind, and the grasshopper after his kind.

11:23 but all other flying creeping things, which have four feet,
shall be an abomination unto you.

11:24 and for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the
carcase of them shall be unclean until the even.

11:25 and whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

11:26 the carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not
clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one
that toucheth them shall be unclean.

11:27 and whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts
that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their
carcase shall be unclean until the even.

11:28 and he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you.

11:29 these also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things
that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise
after his kind, 11:30 and the ferret, and the chameleon, and the
lizard, and the snail, and the mole.

11:31 these are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth
touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even.

11:32 and upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall,
it shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or
skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done, it
must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it
shall be cleansed.

11:33 and every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth,
whatsoever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it.

11:34 of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh
shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel
shall be unclean.

11:35 and every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth
shall be unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shall
be broken down: for they are unclean and shall be unclean unto you.

11:36 nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of
water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be
unclean.

11:37 and if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which
is to be sown, it shall be clean.

11:38 but if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their
carcase fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.

11:39 and if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the
carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even.

11:40 and he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

11:41 and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be
an abomination; it shall not be eaten.

11:42 whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all
four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an
abomination.

11:43 ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing
that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them,
that ye should be defiled thereby.

11:44 for i am the lord your god: ye shall therefore sanctify
yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for i am holy: neither shall ye
defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth.

11:45 for i am the lord that bringeth you up out of the land of egypt,
to be your god: ye shall therefore be holy, for i am holy.

11:46 this is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every
living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that
creepeth upon the earth: 11:47 to make a difference between the
unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the
beast that may not be eaten.

12:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 12:2 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, if a woman have conceived seed, and born a
man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days
of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean.

12:3 and in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised.

12:4 and she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three
and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the
sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.

12:5 but if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two
weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of
her purifying threescore and six days.

12:6 and when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or
for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt
offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering,
unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:
12:7 who shall offer it before the lord, and make an atonement for
her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. this is
the law for her that hath born a male or a female.

12:8 and if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for
her, and she shall be clean.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron, saying, 13:2 when a man
shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot,
and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he
shall be brought unto aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the
priests: 13:3 and the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of
the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the
plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague
of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him
unclean.

13:4 if the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in
sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned
white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven
days: 13:5 and the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread
not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more:
13:6 and the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in
the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and
he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.

13:7 but if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he
hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of
the priest again.

13:8 and if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the
skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy.

13:9 when the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought
unto the priest; 13:10 and the priest shall see him: and, behold, if
the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white,
and there be quick raw flesh in the rising; 13:11 it is an old leprosy
in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean,
and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean.

13:12 and if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to
his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh; 13:13 then the priest shall
consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he
shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned
white: he is clean.

13:14 but when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.

13:15 and the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be
unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.

13:16 or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he
shall come unto the priest; 13:17 and the priest shall see him: and,
behold, if the plague be turned into white; then the priest shall
pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.

13:18 the flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil,
and is healed, 13:19 and in the place of the boil there be a white
rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be
shewed to the priest; 13:20 and if, when the priest seeth it, behold,
it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned
white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of
leprosy broken out of the boil.

13:21 but if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat
dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:22 and if it
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is a plague.

13:23 but if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is
a burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

13:24 or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot
burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot,
somewhat reddish, or white; 13:25 then the priest shall look upon it:
and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it be
in sight deeper than the skin; it is a leprosy broken out of the
burning: wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the
plague of leprosy.

13:26 but if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but
be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:27
and the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.

13:28 and if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the
skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the
priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is an inflammation of the
burning.

13:29 if a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;
13:30 then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in
sight deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair;
then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scall, even a
leprosy upon the head or beard.

13:31 and if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold,
it be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black
hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of
the scall seven days: 13:32 and in the seventh day the priest shall
look on the plague: and, behold, if the scall spread not, and there be
in it no yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight deeper than the
skin; 13:33 he shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and
the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more:
13:34 and in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and,
behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper
than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall
wash his clothes, and be clean.

13:35 but if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;
13:36 then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be
spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is
unclean.

13:37 but if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is
black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the
priest shall pronounce him clean.

13:38 if a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright
spots, even white bright spots; 13:39 then the priest shall look: and,
behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish
white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.

13:40 and the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; yet
is he clean.

13:41 and he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head
toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean.

13:42 and if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white
reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald
forehead.

13:43 then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising
of the sore be white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald
forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh; 13:44 he
is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounce him
utterly unclean; his plague is in his head.

13:45 and the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent,
and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
shall cry, unclean, unclean.

13:46 all the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be
defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall
his habitation be.

13:47 the garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be
a woollen garment, or a linen garment; 13:48 whether it be in the
warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any
thing made of skin; 13:49 and if the plague be greenish or reddish in
the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in
any thing of skin; it is a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto
the priest: 13:50 and the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut
up it that hath the plague seven days: 13:51 and he shall look on the
plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment,
either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, or in any work that
is made of skin; the plague is a fretting leprosy; it is unclean.

13:52 he shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in
woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for
it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.

13:53 and if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not
spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any
thing of skin; 13:54 then the priest shall command that they wash the
thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more:
13:55 and the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is
washed: and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and
the plague be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the
fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.

13:56 and if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark
after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or
out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof: 13:57 and if
it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or
in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that
wherein the plague is with fire.

13:58 and the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of
skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from
them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.

13:59 this is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen
or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to
pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.

14:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 14:2 this shall be the law
of the leper in the day of his cleansing: he shall be brought unto the
priest: 14:3 and the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the
priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in
the leper; 14:4 then shall the priest command to take for him that is
to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop: 14:5 and the priest shall command that one of the birds be
killed in an earthen vessel over running water: 14:6 as for the living
bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the
hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the
bird that was killed over the running water: 14:7 and he shall
sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times,
and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose
into the open field.

14:8 and he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave
off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and
after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of
his tent seven days.

14:9 but it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his
hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he
shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his
flesh in water, and he shall be clean.

14:10 and on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without
blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three
tenth deals of fine flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and
one log of oil.

14:11 and the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that
is to be made clean, and those things, before the lord, at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation: 14:12 and the priest shall take
one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of
oil, and wave them for a wave offering before the lord: 14:13 and he
shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering
and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering is
the priest's, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy: 14:14 and
the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and
the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is
to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the
great toe of his right foot: 14:15 and the priest shall take some of
the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand: 14:16
and the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his
left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times
before the lord: 14:17 and of the rest of the oil that is in his hand
shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering: 14:18
and the remnant of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall pour
upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make
an atonement for him before the lord.

14:19 and the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an
atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and
afterward he shall kill the burnt offering: 14:20 and the priest shall
offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.

14:21 and if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take
one lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for
him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering, and a log of oil; 14:22 and two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin
offering, and the other a burnt offering.

14:23 and he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto
the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
before the lord.

14:24 and the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and
the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering
before the lord: 14:25 and he shall kill the lamb of the trespass
offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass
offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot: 14:26 and the priest shall pour of the oil into
the palm of his own left hand: 14:27 and the priest shall sprinkle
with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven
times before the lord: 14:28 and the priest shall put of the oil that
is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe
of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass
offering: 14:29 and the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand
he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an
atonement for him before the lord.

14:30 and he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get; 14:31 even such as he is able to get, the
one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the
meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is
to be cleansed before the lord.

14:32 this is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose
hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.

14:33 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 14:34 when
ye be come into the land of canaan, which i give to you for a
possession, and i put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of
your possession; 14:35 and he that owneth the house shall come and
tell the priest, saying, it seemeth to me there is as it were a plague
in the house: 14:36 then the priest shall command that they empty the
house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that
is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go
in to see the house: 14:37 and he shall look on the plague, and,
behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house with hollow
strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;
14:38 then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the
house, and shut up the house seven days: 14:39 and the priest shall
come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, if the plague
be spread in the walls of the house; 14:40 then the priest shall
command that they take away the stones in which the plague is, and
they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city: 14:41 and
he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they
shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into an
unclean place: 14:42 and they shall take other stones, and put them in
the place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall
plaister the house.

14:43 and if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after
that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the
house, and after it is plaistered; 14:44 then the priest shall come
and look, and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a
fretting leprosy in the house; it is unclean.

14:45 and he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the
timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry
them forth out of the city into an unclean place.

14:46 moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is
shut up shall be unclean until the even.

14:47 and he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he
that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.

14:48 and if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold,
the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was
plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because
the plague is healed.

14:49 and he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar
wood, and scarlet, and hyssop: 14:50 and he shall kill the one of the
birds in an earthen vessel over running water: 14:51 and he shall take
the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird,
and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water,
and sprinkle the house seven times: 14:52 and he shall cleanse the
house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with
the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and
with the scarlet: 14:53 but he shall let go the living bird out of the
city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it
shall be clean.

14:54 this is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
14:55 and for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 14:56 and for
a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 14:57 to teach when
it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.

15:1 and the lord spake unto moses and to aaron, saying, 15:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when any man hath a
running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean.

15:3 and this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh
run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his
uncleanness.

15:4 every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.

15:5 and whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:6 and he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the
issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the even.

15:7 and he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:8 and if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then
he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
until the even.

15:9 and what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall
be unclean.

15:10 and whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be
unclean until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:11 and whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not
rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:12 and the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue,
shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.

15:13 and when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he
shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.

15:14 and on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or
two young pigeons, and come before the lord unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest: 15:15
and the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
him before the lord for his issue.

15:16 and if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he
shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:17 and every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of
copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even.

15:18 the woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation,
they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:19 and if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be
blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her
shall be unclean until the even.

15:20 and every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be
unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.

15:21 and whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even.

15:22 and whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash
his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:23 and if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth,
when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.

15:24 and if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him,
he shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall
be unclean.

15:25 and if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the
time of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her
separation; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as
the days of her separation: she shall be unclean.

15:26 every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be
unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon
shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her separation.

15:27 and whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even.

15:28 but if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to
herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.

15:29 and on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or
two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

15:30 and the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
her before the lord for the issue of her uncleanness.

15:31 thus shall ye separate the children of israel from their
uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile
my tabernacle that is among them.

15:32 this is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed
goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; 15:33 and of her that is
sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of
the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.

16:1 and the lord spake unto moses after the death of the two sons of
aaron, when they offered before the lord, and died; 16:2 and the lord
said unto moses, speak unto aaron thy brother, that he come not at all
times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which
is upon the ark; that he die not: for i will appear in the cloud upon
the mercy seat.

16:3 thus shall aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock
for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.

16:4 he shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen
breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and
with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments;
therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.

16:5 and he shall take of the congregation of the children of israel
two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt
offering.

16:6 and aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.

16:7 and he shall take the two goats, and present them before the lord
at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

16:8 and aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the
lord, and the other lot for the scapegoat.

16:9 and aaron shall bring the goat upon which the lord's lot fell,
and offer him for a sin offering.

16:10 but the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall
be presented alive before the lord, to make an atonement with him, and
to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.

16:11 and aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is
for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his
house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for
himself: 16:12 and he shall take a censer full of burning coals of
fire from off the altar before the lord, and his hands full of sweet
incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail: 16:13 and he shall
put the incense upon the fire before the lord, that the cloud of the
incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he
die not: 16:14 and he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and
sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before
the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven
times.

16:15 then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the
people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as
he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy
seat, and before the mercy seat: 16:16 and he shall make an atonement
for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the children of
israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so
shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth
among them in the midst of their uncleanness.

16:17 and there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation
when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come
out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household,
and for all the congregation of israel.

16:18 and he shall go out unto the altar that is before the lord, and
make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock,
and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar
round about.

16:19 and he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven
times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the
children of israel.

16:20 and when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and
the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the
live goat: 16:21 and aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of
the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of
a fit man into the wilderness: 16:22 and the goat shall bear upon him
all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go
the goat in the wilderness.

16:23 and aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation,
and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went
into the holy place, and shall leave them there: 16:24 and he shall
wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments,
and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering
of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people.

16:25 and the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.

16:26 and he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the
camp.

16:27 and the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin
offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy
place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in
the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.

16:28 and he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.

16:29 and this shall be a statute for ever unto you: that in the
seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your
souls, and do no work at all, whether it be one of your own country,
or a stranger that sojourneth among you: 16:30 for on that day shall
the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be
clean from all your sins before the lord.

16:31 it shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict
your souls, by a statute for ever.

16:32 and the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall
consecrate to minister in the priest's office in his father's stead,
shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the
holy garments: 16:33 and he shall make an atonement for the holy
sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for
the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.

16:34 and this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an
atonement for the children of israel for all their sins once a year.
and he did as the lord commanded moses.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto aaron, and
unto his sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto them;
this is the thing which the lord hath commanded, saying, 17:3 what man
soever there be of the house of israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb,
or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp, 17:4 and
bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
to offer an offering unto the lord before the tabernacle of the lord;
blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man
shall be cut off from among his people: 17:5 to the end that the
children of israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the
open field, even that they may bring them unto the lord, unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them
for peace offerings unto the lord.

17:6 and the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the
lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the
fat for a sweet savour unto the lord.

17:7 and they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after
whom they have gone a whoring. this shall be a statute for ever unto
them throughout their generations.

17:8 and thou shalt say unto them, whatsoever man there be of the
house of israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that
offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice, 17:9 and bringeth it not unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the
lord; even that man shall be cut off from among his people.

17:10 and whatsoever man there be of the house of israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; i
will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will
cut him off from among his people.

17:11 for the life of the flesh is in the blood: and i have given it
to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is
the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.

17:12 therefore i said unto the children of israel, no soul of you
shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you
eat blood.

17:13 and whatsoever man there be of the children of israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast
or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof,
and cover it with dust.

17:14 for it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life
thereof: therefore i said unto the children of israel, ye shall eat
the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the
blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.

17:15 and every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that
which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or
a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in
water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.

17:16 but if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear
his iniquity.

18:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, i am the lord your god.

18:3 after the doings of the land of egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye
not do: and after the doings of the land of canaan, whither i bring
you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.

18:4 ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk
therein: i am the lord your god.

18:5 ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a
man do, he shall live in them: i am the lord.

18:6 none of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to
uncover their nakedness: i am the lord.

18:7 the nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother,
shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her
nakedness.

18:8 the nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is
thy father's nakedness.

18:9 the nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or
daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad,
even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.

18:10 the nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's
daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is
thine own nakedness.

18:11 the nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy
father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

18:12 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister: she
is thy father's near kinswoman.

18:13 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister: for
she is thy mother's near kinswoman.

18:14 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother,
thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.

18:15 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she
is thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

18:16 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it
is thy brother's nakedness.

18:17 thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her
daughter, neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her
daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near
kinswomen: it is wickedness.

18:18 neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to
uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.

18:19 also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her
nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.

18:20 moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife,
to defile thyself with her.

18:21 and thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy god: i am the lord.

18:22 thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
abomination.

18:23 neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself
therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down
thereto: it is confusion.

18:24 defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all
these the nations are defiled which i cast out before you: 18:25 and
the land is defiled: therefore i do visit the iniquity thereof upon
it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.

18:26 ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall
not commit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation,
nor any stranger that sojourneth among you: 18:27 (for all these
abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and
the land is defiled;) 18:28 that the land spue not you out also, when
ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.

18:29 for whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the
souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.

18:30 therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any
one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and
that ye defile not yourselves therein: i am the lord your god.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 19:2 speak unto all the
congregation of the children of israel, and say unto them, ye shall be
holy: for i the lord your god am holy.

19:3 ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my
sabbaths: i am the lord your god.

19:4 turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: i am
the lord your god.

19:5 and if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the lord, ye
shall offer it at your own will.

19:6 it shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow:
and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the
fire.

19:7 and if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable; it
shall not be accepted.

19:8 therefore every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity,
because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the lord: and that soul
shall be cut off from among his people.

19:9 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly
reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings
of thy harvest.

19:10 and thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather
every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and
stranger: i am the lord your god.

19:11 ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another.

19:12 and ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou
profane the name of thy god: i am the lord.

19:13 thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages
of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the
morning.

19:14 thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before
the blind, but shalt fear thy god: i am the lord.

19:15 ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty:
but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.

19:16 thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people:
neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour; i am the
lord.

19:17 thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in
any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.

19:18 thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children
of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: i am the
lord.

19:19 ye shall keep my statutes. thou shalt not let thy cattle gender
with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed:
neither shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.

19:20 and whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid,
betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given
her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because
she was not free.

19:21 and he shall bring his trespass offering unto the lord, unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass
offering.

19:22 and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of
the trespass offering before the lord for his sin which he hath done:
and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him.

19:23 and when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all
manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as
uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it
shall not be eaten of.

19:24 but in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to
praise the lord withal.

19:25 and in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it
may yield unto you the increase thereof: i am the lord your god.

19:26 ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use
enchantment, nor observe times.

19:27 ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou
mar the corners of thy beard.

19:28 ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor
print any marks upon you: i am the lord.

19:29 do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest
the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.

19:30 ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: i am the
lord.

19:31 regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
wizards, to be defiled by them: i am the lord your god.

19:32 thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of
the old man, and fear thy god: i am the lord.

19:33 and if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not
vex him.

19:34 but the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one
born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were
strangers in the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

19:35 ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in
weight, or in measure.

19:36 just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
ye have: i am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt.

19:37 therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my
judgments, and do them: i am the lord.

20:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:2 again, thou shalt say
to the children of israel, whosoever he be of the children of israel,
or of the strangers that sojourn in israel, that giveth any of his
seed unto molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the
land shall stone him with stones.

20:3 and i will set my face against that man, and will cut him off
from among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto molech,
to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.

20:4 and if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from
the man, when he giveth of his seed unto molech, and kill him not:
20:5 then i will set my face against that man, and against his family,
and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit
whoredom with molech, from among their people.

20:6 and the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits,
and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, i will even set my face
against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.

20:7 sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for i am the lord
your god.

20:8 and ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: i am the lord which
sanctify you.

20:9 for every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be
surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his
blood shall be upon him.

20:10 and the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife,
even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the
adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.

20:11 and the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his
father's nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their
blood shall be upon them.

20:12 and if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall
surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall
be upon them.

20:13 if a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both
of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

20:14 and if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they
shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no
wickedness among you.

20:15 and if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death:
and ye shall slay the beast.

20:16 and if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto,
thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to
death; their blood shall be upon them.

20:17 and if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or
his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his
nakedness; it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the
sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; he
shall bear his iniquity.

20:18 and if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and
shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she
hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be
cut off from among their people.

20:19 and thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister,
nor of thy father's sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall
bear their iniquity.

20:20 and if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered
his uncle's nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die
childless.

20:21 and if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is an unclean
thing: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be
childless.

20:22 ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments,
and do them: that the land, whither i bring you to dwell therein, spue
you not out.

20:23 and ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which i cast
out before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore i
abhorred them.

20:24 but i have said unto you, ye shall inherit their land, and i
will give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and
honey: i am the lord your god, which have separated you from other
people.

20:25 ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and
unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make
your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living
thing that creepeth on the ground, which i have separated from you as
unclean.

20:26 and ye shall be holy unto me: for i the lord am holy, and have
severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

20:27 a man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with
stones: their blood shall be upon them.

21:1 and the lord said unto moses, speak unto the priests the sons of
aaron, and say unto them, there shall none be defiled for the dead
among his people: 21:2 but for his kin, that is near unto him, that
is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his
daughter, and for his brother.

21:3 and for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath
had no husband; for her may he be defiled.

21:4 but he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his
people, to profane himself.

21:5 they shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they
shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their
flesh.

21:6 they shall be holy unto their god, and not profane the name of
their god: for the offerings of the lord made by fire, and the bread
of their god, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.

21:7 they shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither
shall they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto
his god.

21:8 thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of
thy god: he shall be holy unto thee: for i the lord, which sanctify
you, am holy.

21:9 and the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing
the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.

21:10 and he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose
head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on
the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes; 21:11
neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his
father, or for his mother; 21:12 neither shall he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his god; for the crown of the
anointing oil of his god is upon him: i am the lord.

21:13 and he shall take a wife in her virginity.

21:14 a widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these
shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to
wife.

21:15 neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for i the
lord do sanctify him.

21:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 21:17 speak unto aaron,
saying, whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any
blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his god.

21:18 for whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not
approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any
thing superfluous, 21:19 or a man that is brokenfooted, or
brokenhanded, 21:20 or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish
in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken; 21:21
no man that hath a blemish of the seed of aaron the priest shall come
nigh to offer the offerings of the lord made by fire: he hath a
blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his god.

21:22 he shall eat the bread of his god, both of the most holy, and of
the holy.

21:23 only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the
altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries:
for i the lord do sanctify them.

21:24 and moses told it unto aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
children of israel.

22:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:2 speak unto aaron and
to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the
children of israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those
things which they hallow unto me: i am the lord.

22:3 say unto them, whosoever he be of all your seed among your
generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of
israel hallow unto the lord, having his uncleanness upon him, that
soul shall be cut off from my presence: i am the lord.

22:4 what man soever of the seed of aaron is a leper, or hath a
running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean.
and whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man
whose seed goeth from him; 22:5 or whosoever toucheth any creeping
thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take
uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath; 22:6 the soul which hath
touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the
holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.

22:7 and when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward
eat of the holy things; because it is his food.

22:8 that which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not
eat to defile himself therewith; i am the lord.

22:9 they shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for
it, and die therefore, if they profane it: i the lord do sanctify
them.

22:10 there shall no stranger eat of the holy thing: a sojourner of
the priest, or an hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.

22:11 but if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shall eat of
it, and he that is born in his house: they shall eat of his meat.

22:12 if the priest's daughter also be married unto a stranger, she
may not eat of an offering of the holy things.

22:13 but if the priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have
no child, and is returned unto her father's house, as in her youth,
she shall eat of her father's meat: but there shall be no stranger eat
thereof.

22:14 and if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall
put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest
with the holy thing.

22:15 and they shall not profane the holy things of the children of
israel, which they offer unto the lord; 22:16 or suffer them to bear
the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for i the
lord do sanctify them.

22:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:18 speak unto aaron,
and to his sons, and unto all the children of israel, and say unto
them, whatsoever he be of the house of israel, or of the strangers in
israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his
freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the lord for a burnt
offering; 22:19 ye shall offer at your own will a male without
blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

22:20 but whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it
shall not be acceptable for you.

22:21 and whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the
lord to accomplish his vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep,
it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.

22:22 blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or
scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the lord, nor make an offering
by fire of them upon the altar unto the lord.

22:23 either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or
lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering;
but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

22:24 ye shall not offer unto the lord that which is bruised, or
crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof
in your land.

22:25 neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your
god of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and
blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

22:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 22:27 when a bullock, or
a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days
under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be
accepted for an offering made by fire unto the lord.

22:28 and whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her
young both in one day.

22:29 and when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the
lord, offer it at your own will.

22:30 on the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it
until the morrow: i am the lord.

22:31 therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: i am the
lord.

22:32 neither shall ye profane my holy name; but i will be hallowed
among the children of israel: i am the lord which hallow you, 22:33
that brought you out of the land of egypt, to be your god: i am the
lord.

23:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, concerning the feasts of the
lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are
my feasts.

23:3 six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath
of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the
sabbath of the lord in all your dwellings.

23:4 these are the feasts of the lord, even holy convocations, which
ye shall proclaim in their seasons.

23:5 in the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the lord's
passover.

23:6 and on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of
unleavened bread unto the lord: seven days ye must eat unleavened
bread.

23:7 in the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do
no servile work therein.

23:8 but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the lord seven
days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:10 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come into the land
which i give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye
shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the
priest: 23:11 and he shall wave the sheaf before the lord, to be
accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall
wave it.

23:12 and ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb
without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the lord.

23:13 and the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine
flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the lord for a
sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the
fourth part of an hin.

23:14 and ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green
ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto
your god: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations
in all your dwellings.

23:15 and ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath,
from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven
sabbaths shall be complete: 23:16 even unto the morrow after the
seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new
meat offering unto the lord.

23:17 ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two
tenth deals; they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with
leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the lord.

23:18 and ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of
the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for
a burnt offering unto the lord, with their meat offering, and their
drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto
the lord.

23:19 then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering,
and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.

23:20 and the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits
for a wave offering before the lord, with the two lambs: they shall be
holy to the lord for the priest.

23:21 and ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an
holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it
shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.

23:22 and when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither
shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them
unto the poor, and to the stranger: i am the lord your god.

23:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:24 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, in the seventh month, in the first day of
the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets,
an holy convocation.

23:25 ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the lord.

23:26 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:27 also on the tenth
day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall
be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and
offer an offering made by fire unto the lord.

23:28 and ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of
atonement, to make an atonement for you before the lord your god.

23:29 for whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that
same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.

23:30 and whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day,
the same soul will i destroy from among his people.

23:31 ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

23:32 it shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict
your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto
even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

23:33 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 23:34 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, the fifteenth day of this seventh month
shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the lord.

23:35 on the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no
servile work therein.

23:36 seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the
lord: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye
shall offer an offering made by fire unto the lord: it is a solemn
assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein.

23:37 these are the feasts of the lord, which ye shall proclaim to be
holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the lord, a
burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings,
every thing upon his day: 23:38 beside the sabbaths of the lord, and
beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your
freewill offerings, which ye give unto the lord.

23:39 also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the lord
seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day
shall be a sabbath.

23:40 and ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly
trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and
willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the lord your god
seven days.

23:41 and ye shall keep it a feast unto the lord seven days in the
year.

it shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate
it in the seventh month.

23:42 ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are israelites
born shall dwell in booths: 23:43 that your generations may know that
i made the children of israel to dwell in booths, when i brought them
out of the land of egypt: i am the lord your god.

23:44 and moses declared unto the children of israel the feasts of the
lord.

24:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:2 command the children
of israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.

24:3 without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the
congregation, shall aaron order it from the evening unto the morning
before the lord continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your
generations.

24:4 he shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the
lord continually.

24:5 and thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof:
two tenth deals shall be in one cake.

24:6 and thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure
table before the lord.

24:7 and thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may
be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the
lord.

24:8 every sabbath he shall set it in order before the lord
continually, being taken from the children of israel by an everlasting
covenant.

24:9 and it shall be aaron's and his sons'; and they shall eat it in
the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the
lord made by fire by a perpetual statute.

24:10 and the son of an israelitish woman, whose father was an
egyptian, went out among the children of israel: and this son of the
israelitish woman and a man of israel strove together in the camp;
24:11 and the israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the lord,
and cursed. and they brought him unto moses: (and his mother's name
was shelomith, the daughter of dibri, of the tribe of dan:) 24:12 and
they put him in ward, that the mind of the lord might be shewed them.

24:13 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 24:14 bring forth him
that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay
their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.

24:15 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying,
whosoever curseth his god shall bear his sin.

24:16 and he that blasphemeth the name of the lord, he shall surely be
put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as
well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth
the name of the lord, shall be put to death.

24:17 and he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.

24:18 and he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.

24:19 and if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done,
so shall it be done to him; 24:20 breach for breach, eye for eye,
tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be
done to him again.

24:21 and he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that
killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

24:22 ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as
for one of your own country: for i am the lord your god.

24:23 and moses spake to the children of israel, that they should
bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with
stones. and the children of israel did as the lord commanded moses.

25:1 and the lord spake unto moses in mount sinai, saying, 25:2 speak
unto the children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the
land which i give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the
lord.

25:3 six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt
prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 25:4 but in the
seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for
the lord: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.

25:5 that which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt
not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a
year of rest unto the land.

25:6 and the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and
for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for
thy stranger that sojourneth with thee.

25:7 and for thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shall
all the increase thereof be meat.

25:8 and thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven
times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall
be unto thee forty and nine years.

25:9 then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the
tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make
the trumpet sound throughout all your land.

25:10 and ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be
a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession,
and ye shall return every man unto his family.

25:11 a jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow,
neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes
in it of thy vine undressed.

25:12 for it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat
the increase thereof out of the field.

25:13 in the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his
possession.

25:14 and if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of
thy neighbour's hand, ye shall not oppress one another: 25:15
according to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of
thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he
shall sell unto thee: 25:16 according to the multitude of years thou
shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of
years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number
of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.

25:17 ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear
thy god:for i am the lord your god.

25:18 wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do
them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.

25:19 and the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill,
and dwell therein in safety.

25:20 and if ye shall say, what shall we eat the seventh year? behold,
we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: 25:21 then i will
command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring
forth fruit for three years.

25:22 and ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until
the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old
store.

25:23 the land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine, for
ye are strangers and sojourners with me.

25:24 and in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a
redemption for the land.

25:25 if thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his
possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he
redeem that which his brother sold.

25:26 and if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to
redeem it; 25:27 then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and
restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may
return unto his possession.

25:28 but if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is
sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the
year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return
unto his possession.

25:29 and if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may
redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may
he redeem it.

25:30 and if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then
the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to
him that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in
the jubile.

25:31 but the houses of the villages which have no wall round about
them shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be
redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.

25:32 notwithstanding the cities of the levites, and the houses of the
cities of their possession, may the levites redeem at any time.

25:33 and if a man purchase of the levites, then the house that was
sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of
jubile: for the houses of the cities of the levites are their
possession among the children of israel.

25:34 but the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold;
for it is their perpetual possession.

25:35 and if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee;
then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner; that he may live with thee.

25:36 take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy god; that
thy brother may live with thee.

25:37 thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals for increase.

25:38 i am the lord your god, which brought you forth out of the land
of egypt, to give you the land of canaan, and to be your god.

25:39 and if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be
sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
25:40 but as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with
thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile.

25:41 and then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children
with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the
possession of his fathers shall he return.

25:42 for they are my servants, which i brought forth out of the land
of egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.

25:43 thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy
god.

25:44 both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have,
shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bondmaids.

25:45 moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among
you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you,
which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.

25:46 and ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after
you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for
ever: but over your brethren the children of israel, ye shall not rule
one over another with rigour.

25:47 and if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother
that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or
sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family: 25:48
after that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren
may redeem him: 25:49 either his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem
him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him;
or if he be able, he may redeem himself.

25:50 and he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that
he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale
shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of
an hired servant shall it be with him.

25:51 if there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall
give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was
bought for.

25:52 and if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then
he shall count with him, and according unto his years shall he give
him again the price of his redemption.

25:53 and as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the
other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.

25:54 and if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out
in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.

25:55 for unto me the children of israel are servants; they are my
servants whom i brought forth out of the land of egypt: i am the lord
your god.

26:1 ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up
a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your
land, to bow down unto it: for i am the lord your god.

26:2 ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: i am the
lord.

26:3 if ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
26:4 then i will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield
her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.

26:5 and your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage
shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the
full, and dwell in your land safely.

26:6 and i will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid: and i will rid evil beasts out of the
land, neither shall the sword go through your land.

26:7 and ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you
by the sword.

26:8 and five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you
shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before
you by the sword.

26:9 for i will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and
multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.

26:10 and ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of
the new.

26:11 and i set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor
you.

26:12 and i will walk among you, and will be your god, and ye shall be
my people.

26:13 i am the lord your god, which brought you forth out of the land
of egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and i have broken the
bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.

26:14 but if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
commandments; 26:15 and if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your
soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments,
but that ye break my covenant: 26:16 i also will do this unto you; i
will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague,
that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall
sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.

26:17 and i will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before
your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall
flee when none pursueth you.

26:18 and if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then i will
punish you seven times more for your sins.

26:19 and i will break the pride of your power; and i will make your
heaven as iron, and your earth as brass: 26:20 and your strength shall
be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither
shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.

26:21 and if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; i
will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.

26:22 i will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of
your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number;
and your high ways shall be desolate.

26:23 and if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will
walk contrary unto me; 26:24 then will i also walk contrary unto you,
and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.

26:25 and i will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel
of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities,
i will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into
the hand of the enemy.

26:26 and when i have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall
bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread
again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.

26:27 and if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk
contrary unto me; 26:28 then i will walk contrary unto you also in
fury; and i, even i, will chastise you seven times for your sins.

26:29 and ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye eat.

26:30 and i will destroy your high places, and cut down your images,
and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul
shall abhor you.

26:31 and i will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries
unto desolation, and i will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.

26:32 and i will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies
which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.

26:33 and i will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a
sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities
waste.

26:34 then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth
desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shall the land
rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

26:35 as long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not
rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

26:36 and upon them that are left alive of you i will send a faintness
into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a
shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a
sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.

26:37 and they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword,
when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your
enemies.

26:38 and ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your
enemies shall eat you up.

26:39 and they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity
in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers
shall they pine away with them.

26:40 if they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and
that also they have walked contrary unto me; 26:41 and that i also
have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of
their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 26:42 then will i
remember my covenant with jacob, and also my covenant with isaac, and
also my covenant with abraham will i remember; and i will remember the
land.

26:43 the land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her
sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept
of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they
despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.

26:44 and yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies,
i will not cast them away, neither will i abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for i am the lord their
god.

26:45 but i will for their sakes remember the covenant of their
ancestors, whom i brought forth out of the land of egypt in the sight
of the heathen, that i might be their god: i am the lord.

26:46 these are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the lord
made between him and the children of israel in mount sinai by the hand
of moses.

27:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when a man shall make a
singular vow, the persons shall be for the lord by thy estimation.

27:3 and thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old
even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels
of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

27:4 and if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty
shekels.

27:5 and if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then
thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female
ten shekels.

27:6 and if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy
estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the
female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.

27:7 and if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male,
then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten
shekels.

27:8 but if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present
himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according
to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.

27:9 and if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the
lord, all that any man giveth of such unto the lord shall be holy.

27:10 he shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad
for a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and
the exchange thereof shall be holy.

27:11 and if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a
sacrifice unto the lord, then he shall present the beast before the
priest: 27:12 and the priest shall value it, whether it be good or
bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.

27:13 but if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part
thereof unto thy estimation.

27:14 and when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the
lord, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as
the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.

27:15 and if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he
shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and
it shall be his.

27:16 and if a man shall sanctify unto the lord some part of a field
of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed
thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of
silver.

27:17 if he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to
thy estimation it shall stand.

27:18 but if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest
shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain,
even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy
estimation.

27:19 and if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it,
then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto
it, and it shall be assured to him.

27:20 and if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the
field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.

27:21 but the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy
unto the lord, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the
priest's.

27:22 and if a man sanctify unto the lord a field which he hath
bought, which is not of the fields of his possession; 27:23 then the
priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto
the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that
day, as a holy thing unto the lord.

27:24 in the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of
whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did
belong.

27:25 and all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the
sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.

27:26 only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the lord's
firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is
the lord's.

27:27 and if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it
according to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it
thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to
thy estimation.

27:28 notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto
the lord of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field
of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is
most holy unto the lord.

27:29 none devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed;
but shall surely be put to death.

27:30 and all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land,
or of the fruit of the tree, is the lord's: it is holy unto the lord.

27:31 and if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall
add thereto the fifth part thereof.

27:32 and concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of
whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the
lord.

27:33 he shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he
change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change
thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.

27:34 these are the commandments, which the lord commanded moses for
the children of israel in mount sinai.




the fourth book of moses:  called numbers


1:1 and the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
in the second year after they were come out of the land of egypt,
saying, 1:2 take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the
number of their names, every male by their polls; 1:3 from twenty
years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in israel:
thou and aaron shall number them by their armies.

1:4 and with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head
of the house of his fathers.

1:5 and these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of
the tribe of reuben; elizur the son of shedeur.

1:6 of simeon; shelumiel the son of zurishaddai.

1:7 of judah; nahshon the son of amminadab.

1:8 of issachar; nethaneel the son of zuar.

1:9 of zebulun; eliab the son of helon.

1:10 of the children of joseph: of ephraim; elishama the son of
ammihud: of manasseh; gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

1:11 of benjamin; abidan the son of gideoni.

1:12 of dan; ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

1:13 of asher; pagiel the son of ocran.

1:14 of gad; eliasaph the son of deuel.

1:15 of naphtali; ahira the son of enan.

1:16 these were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the
tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in israel.

1:17 and moses and aaron took these men which are expressed by their
names: 1:18 and they assembled all the congregation together on the
first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.

1:19 as the lord commanded moses, so he numbered them in the
wilderness of sinai.

1:20 and the children of reuben, israel's eldest son, by their
generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
1:21 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of reuben,
were forty and six thousand and five hundred.

1:22 of the children of simeon, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of
them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male
from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to
war; 1:23 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of
simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.

1:24 of the children of gad, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:25 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.

1:26 of the children of judah, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:27 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

1:28 of the children of issachar, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:29 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.

1:30 of the children of zebulun, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:31 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.

1:32 of the children of joseph, namely, of the children of ephraim, by
their generations, after their families, by the house of their
fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war; 1:33 those that
were numbered of them, even of the tribe of ephraim, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

1:34 of the children of manasseh, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:35 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of manasseh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.

1:36 of the children of benjamin, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:37 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.

1:38 of the children of dan, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:39 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of dan, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

1:40 of the children of asher, by their generations, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of
the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go
forth to war; 1:41 those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe
of asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.

1:42 of the children of naphtali, throughout their generations, after
their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to
go forth to war; 1:43 those that were numbered of them, even of the
tribe of naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

1:44 these are those that were numbered, which moses and aaron
numbered, and the princes of israel, being twelve men: each one was
for the house of his fathers.

1:45 so were all those that were numbered of the children of israel,
by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in israel; 1:46 even all they that
were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five
hundred and fifty.

1:47 but the levites after the tribe of their fathers were not
numbered among them.

1:48 for the lord had spoken unto moses, saying, 1:49 only thou shalt
not number the tribe of levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of israel: 1:50 but thou shalt appoint the levites over the
tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over
all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all
the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp
round about the tabernacle.

1:51 and when the tabernacle setteth forward, the levites shall take
it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the levites shall
set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

1:52 and the children of israel shall pitch their tents, every man by
his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their
hosts.

1:53 but the levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of israel: and the levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.

1:54 and the children of israel did according to all that the lord
commanded moses, so did they.

2:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 2:2 every
man of the children of israel shall pitch by his own standard, with
the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch.

2:3 and on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of
the standard of the camp of judah pitch throughout their armies: and
nahshon the son of amminadab shall be captain of the children of
judah.

2:4 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.

2:5 and those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
issachar: and nethaneel the son of zuar shall be captain of the
children of issachar.

2:6 and his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
four thousand and four hundred.

2:7 then the tribe of zebulun: and eliab the son of helon shall be
captain of the children of zebulun.

2:8 and his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
seven thousand and four hundred.

2:9 all that were numbered in the camp of judah were an hundred
thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred,
throughout their armies. these shall first set forth.

2:10 on the south side shall be the standard of the camp of reuben
according to their armies: and the captain of the children of reuben
shall be elizur the son of shedeur.

2:11 and his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty
and six thousand and five hundred.

2:12 and those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of simeon: and
the captain of the children of simeon shall be shelumiel the son of
zurishaddai.

2:13 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and nine thousand and three hundred.

2:14 then the tribe of gad: and the captain of the sons of gad shall
be eliasaph the son of reuel.

2:15 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.

2:16 all that were numbered in the camp of reuben were an hundred
thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty,
throughout their armies. and they shall set forth in the second rank.

2:17 then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with
the camp of the levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so
shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards.

2:18 on the west side shall be the standard of the camp of ephraim
according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of ephraim
shall be elishama the son of ammihud.

2:19 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
thousand and five hundred.

2:20 and by him shall be the tribe of manasseh: and the captain of the
children of manasseh shall be gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

2:21 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and two thousand and two hundred.

2:22 then the tribe of benjamin: and the captain of the sons of
benjamin shall be abidan the son of gideoni.

2:23 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and five thousand and four hundred.

2:24 all that were numbered of the camp of ephraim were an hundred
thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies.
and they shall go forward in the third rank.

2:25 the standard of the camp of dan shall be on the north side by
their armies: and the captain of the children of dan shall be ahiezer
the son of ammishaddai.

2:26 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

2:27 and those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of asher: and the
captain of the children of asher shall be pagiel the son of ocran.

2:28 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and one thousand and five hundred.

2:29 then the tribe of naphtali: and the captain of the children of
naphtali shall be ahira the son of enan.

2:30 and his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and three thousand and four hundred.

2:31 all they that were numbered in the camp of dan were an hundred
thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. they shall go
hindmost with their standards.

2:32 these are those which were numbered of the children of israel by
the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps
throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifty.

2:33 but the levites were not numbered among the children of israel;
as the lord commanded moses.

2:34 and the children of israel did according to all that the lord
commanded moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
their fathers.

3:1 these also are the generations of aaron and moses in the day that
the lord spake with moses in mount sinai.

3:2 and these are the names of the sons of aaron; nadab the firstborn,
and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

3:3 these are the names of the sons of aaron, the priests which were
anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.

3:4 and nadab and abihu died before the lord, when they offered
strange fire before the lord, in the wilderness of sinai, and they had
no children: and eleazar and ithamar ministered in the priest's office
in the sight of aaron their father.

3:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:6 bring the tribe of levi
near, and present them before aaron the priest, that they may minister
unto him.

3:7 and they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:8 and they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the charge of the children of israel, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

3:9 and thou shalt give the levites unto aaron and to his sons: they
are wholly given unto him out of the children of israel.

3:10 and thou shalt appoint aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
to death.

3:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:12 and i, behold, i have
taken the levites from among the children of israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of israel:
therefore the levites shall be mine; 3:13 because all the firstborn
are mine; for on the day that i smote all the firstborn in the land of
egypt i hallowed unto me all the firstborn in israel, both man and
beast: mine shall they be: i am the lord.

3:14 and the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, saying,
3:15 number the children of levi after the house of their fathers, by
their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou
number them.

3:16 and moses numbered them according to the word of the lord, as he
was commanded.

3:17 and these were the sons of levi by their names; gershon, and
kohath, and merari.

3:18 and these are the names of the sons of gershon by their families;
libni, and shimei.

3:19 and the sons of kohath by their families; amram, and izehar,
hebron, and uzziel.

3:20 and the sons of merari by their families; mahli, and mushi. these
are the families of the levites according to the house of their
fathers.

3:21 of gershon was the family of the libnites, and the family of the
shimites: these are the families of the gershonites.

3:22 those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all
the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered
of them were seven thousand and five hundred.

3:23 the families of the gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle
westward.

3:24 and the chief of the house of the father of the gershonites shall
be eliasaph the son of lael.

3:25 and the charge of the sons of gershon in the tabernacle of the
congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering
thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, 3:26 and the hangings of the court, and the curtain for
the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar
round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof.

3:27 and of kohath was the family of the amramites, and the family of
the izeharites, and the family of the hebronites, and the family of
the uzzielites: these are the families of the kohathites.

3:28 in the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were
eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.

3:29 the families of the sons of kohath shall pitch on the side of the
tabernacle southward.

3:30 and the chief of the house of the father of the families of the
kohathites shall be elizaphan the son of uzziel.

3:31 and their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the
candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.

3:32 and eleazar the son of aaron the priest shall be chief over the
chief of the levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the
charge of the sanctuary.

3:33 of merari was the family of the mahlites, and the family of the
mushites: these are the families of merari.

3:34 and those that were numbered of them, according to the number of
all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two
hundred.

3:35 and the chief of the house of the father of the families of
merari was zuriel the son of abihail: these shall pitch on the side of
the tabernacle northward.

3:36 and under the custody and charge of the sons of merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all
that serveth thereto, 3:37 and the pillars of the court round about,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.

3:38 but those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be moses,
and aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the
charge of the children of israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death.

3:39 all that were numbered of the levites, which moses and aaron
numbered at the commandment of the lord, throughout their families,
all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two
thousand.

3:40 and the lord said unto moses, number all the firstborn of the
males of the children of israel from a month old and upward, and take
the number of their names.

3:41 and thou shalt take the levites for me (i am the lord) instead of
all the firstborn among the children of israel; and the cattle of the
levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children
of israel.

3:42 and moses numbered, as the lord commanded him, all the firstborn
among the children of israel.

3:43 and all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month
old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and
two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen.

3:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 3:45 take the levites
instead of all the firstborn among the children of israel, and the
cattle of the levites instead of their cattle; and the levites shall
be mine: i am the lord.

3:46 and for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of israel,
which are more than the levites; 3:47 thou shalt even take five
shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt
thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:) 3:48 and thou shalt
give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto aaron and to his sons.

3:49 and moses took the redemption money of them that were over and
above them that were redeemed by the levites: 3:50 of the firstborn of
the children of israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and
threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 3:51
and moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto aaron and to
his sons, according to the word of the lord, as the lord commanded
moses.

4:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 4:2 take the
sum of the sons of kohath from among the sons of levi, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, 4:3 from thirty years old and
upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.

4:4 this shall be the service of the sons of kohath in the tabernacle
of the congregation, about the most holy things: 4:5 and when the camp
setteth forward, aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take
down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it: 4:6
and shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shall spread
over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.

4:7 and upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,
and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers
to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon: 4:8 and
they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same
with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put in the staves
thereof.

4:9 and they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of
the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all
the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it: 4:10 and
they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of
badgers' skins, and shall put it upon a bar.

4:11 and upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and
cover it with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put to the
staves thereof: 4:12 and they shall take all the instruments of
ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a
cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skins, and
shall put them on a bar: 4:13 and they shall take away the ashes from
the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon: 4:14 and they shall put
upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it,
even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all
the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of
badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it.

4:15 and when aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set
forward; after that, the sons of kohath shall come to bear it: but
they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. these things are
the burden of the sons of kohath in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:16 and to the office of eleazar the son of aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily
meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the
tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
vessels thereof.

4:17 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron saying, 4:18 cut ye
not off the tribe of the families of the kohathites from among the
levites: 4:19 but thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die,
when they approach unto the most holy things: aaron and his sons shall
go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
4:20 but they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,
lest they die.

4:21 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 4:22 take also the sum of
the sons of gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their
families; 4:23 from thirty years old and upward until fifty years old
shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to
do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.

4:24 this is the service of the families of the gershonites, to serve,
and for burdens: 4:25 and they shall bear the curtains of the
tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and
the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the
hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, 4:26 and
the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of
the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about,
and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all
that is made for them: so shall they serve.

4:27 at the appointment of aaron and his sons shall be all the service
of the sons of the gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their
service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.

4:28 this is the service of the families of the sons of gershon in the
tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the
hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:29 as for the sons of merari, thou shalt number them after their
families, by the house of their fathers; 4:30 from thirty years old
and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one
that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of
the congregation.

4:31 and this is the charge of their burden, according to all their
service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the
tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets
thereof, 4:32 and the pillars of the court round about, and their
sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments,
and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the
instruments of the charge of their burden.

4:33 this is the service of the families of the sons of merari,
according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation,
under the hand of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

4:34 and moses and aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered
the sons of the kohathites after their families, and after the house
of their fathers, 4:35 from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the
work in the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:36 and those that were
numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and
fifty.

4:37 these were they that were numbered of the families of the
kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, which moses and aaron did number according to the
commandment of the lord by the hand of moses.

4:38 and those that were numbered of the sons of gershon, throughout
their families, and by the house of their fathers, 4:39 from thirty
years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that
entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:40 even those that were numbered of them, throughout
their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and
six hundred and thirty.

4:41 these are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of
gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the
congregation, whom moses and aaron did number according to the
commandment of the lord.

4:42 and those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, 4:43
from thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one
that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation, 4:44 even those that were numbered of them after their
families, were three thousand and two hundred.

4:45 these be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
merari, whom moses and aaron numbered according to the word of the
lord by the hand of moses.

4:46 all those that were numbered of the levites, whom moses and aaron
and the chief of israel numbered, after their families, and after the
house of their fathers, 4:47 from thirty years old and upward even
unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the
ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

4:48 even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and
five hundred and fourscore, 4:49 according to the commandment of the
lord they were numbered by the hand of moses, every one according to
his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of
him, as the lord commanded moses.

5:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:2 command the children of
israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that
hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead: 5:3 both male and
female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they
defile not their camps, in the midst whereof i dwell.

5:4 and the children of israel did so, and put them out without the
camp: as the lord spake unto moses, so did the children of israel.

5:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:6 speak unto the children
of israel, when a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit,
to do a trespass against the lord, and that person be guilty; 5:7 then
they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall
recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it
the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath
trespassed.

5:8 but if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto,
let the trespass be recompensed unto the lord, even to the priest;
beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made
for him.

5:9 and every offering of all the holy things of the children of
israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.

5:10 and every man's hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man
giveth the priest, it shall be his.

5:11 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 5:12 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, if any man's wife go aside, and
commit a trespass against him, 5:13 and a man lie with her carnally,
and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she
be defiled, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken
with the manner; 5:14 and the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he
be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of
jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not
defiled: 5:15 then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and
he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of
barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense
thereon; for it is an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial,
bringing iniquity to remembrance.

5:16 and the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the lord:
5:17 and the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of
the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take,
and put it into the water: 5:18 and the priest shall set the woman
before the lord, and uncover the woman's head, and put the offering of
memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy offering: and the priest
shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse: 5:19
and the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, if
no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to
uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be thou free from
this bitter water that causeth the curse: 5:20 but if thou hast gone
aside to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and
some man have lain with thee beside thine husband: 5:21 then the
priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest
shall say unto the woman, the lord make thee a curse and an oath among
thy people, when the lord doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to
swell; 5:22 and this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy
bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot: and the
woman shall say, amen, amen.

5:23 and the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall
blot them out with the bitter water: 5:24 and he shall cause the woman
to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that
causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter.

5:25 then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the
woman's hand, and shall wave the offering before the lord, and offer
it upon the altar: 5:26 and the priest shall take an handful of the
offering, even the memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and
afterward shall cause the woman to drink the water.

5:27 and when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come
to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her
husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her,
and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot:
and the woman shall be a curse among her people.

5:28 and if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be
free, and shall conceive seed.

5:29 this is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another
instead of her husband, and is defiled; 5:30 or when the spirit of
jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall
set the woman before the lord, and the priest shall execute upon her
all this law.

5:31 then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman
shall bear her iniquity.

6:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:2 speak unto the children
of israel, and say unto them, when either man or woman shall separate
themselves to vow a vow of a nazarite, to separate themselves unto the
lord: 6:3 he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and
shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither
shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.

6:4 all the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made
of the vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.

6:5 all the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor
come upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he
separateth himself unto the lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the
locks of the hair of his head grow.

6:6 all the days that he separateth himself unto the lord he shall
come at no dead body.

6:7 he shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his
mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the
consecration of his god is upon his head.

6:8 all the days of his separation he is holy unto the lord.

6:9 and if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the
head of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of
his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.

6:10 and on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young
pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 6:11 and the priest shall offer the one for a sin
offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make an atonement
for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his head
that same day.

6:12 and he shall consecrate unto the lord the days of his separation,
and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but
the days that were before shall be lost, because his separation was
defiled.

6:13 and this is the law of the nazarite, when the days of his
separation are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation: 6:14 and he shall offer his offering
unto the lord, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a
burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for
a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for peace offerings, 6:15
and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with
oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat
offering, and their drink offerings.

6:16 and the priest shall bring them before the lord, and shall offer
his sin offering, and his burnt offering: 6:17 and he shall offer the
ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the lord, with the basket
of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

6:18 and the nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall take the hair of
the head of his separation, and put it in the fire which is under the
sacrifice of the peace offerings.

6:19 and the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one
unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall
put them upon the hands of the nazarite, after the hair of his
separation is shaven: 6:20 and the priest shall wave them for a wave
offering before the lord: this is holy for the priest, with the wave
breast and heave shoulder: and after that the nazarite may drink wine.

6:21 this is the law of the nazarite who hath vowed, and of his
offering unto the lord for his separation, beside that that his hand
shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after
the law of his separation.

6:22 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 6:23 speak unto aaron and
unto his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless the children of
israel, saying unto them, 6:24 the lord bless thee, and keep thee:
6:25 the lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee: 6:26 the lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace.

6:27 and they shall put my name upon the children of israel, and i
will bless them.

7:1 and it came to pass on the day that moses had fully set up the
tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the
instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and
had anointed them, and sanctified them; 7:2 that the princes of
israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of
the tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered: 7:3 and
they brought their offering before the lord, six covered wagons, and
twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox:
and they brought them before the tabernacle.

7:4 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 7:5 take it of them, that
they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation;
and thou shalt give them unto the levites, to every man according to
his service.

7:6 and moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the
levites.

7:7 two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of gershon,
according to their service: 7:8 and four wagons and eight oxen he gave
unto the sons of merari, according unto their service, under the hand
of ithamar the son of aaron the priest.

7:9 but unto the sons of kohath he gave none: because the service of
the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their
shoulders.

7:10 and the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day
that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before
the altar.

7:11 and the lord said unto moses, they shall offer their offering,
each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.

7:12 and he that offered his offering the first day was nahshon the
son of amminadab, of the tribe of judah: 7:13 and his offering was one
silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels,
one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering: 7:14 one spoon of ten shekels of gold, full of incense: 7:15
one young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering: 7:16 one kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:17 and for a
sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five
lambs of the first year: this was the offering of nahshon the son of
amminadab.

7:18 on the second day nethaneel the son of zuar, prince of issachar,
did offer: 7:19 he offered for his offering one silver charger, the
weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:20 one spoon of
gold of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:21 one young bullock, one ram,
one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:22 one kid of the
goats for a sin offering: 7:23 and for a sacrifice of peace offerings,
two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of nethaneel the son of zuar.

7:24 on the third day eliab the son of helon, prince of the children
of zebulun, did offer: 7:25 his offering was one silver charger, the
weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:26 one golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:27 one young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:28 one kid of
the goats for a sin offering: 7:29 and for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of eliab the son of helon.

7:30 on the fourth day elizur the son of shedeur, prince of the
children of reuben, did offer: 7:31 his offering was one silver
charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver
bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of
them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:32 one
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:33 one young bullock,
one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:34 one
kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:35 and for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of elizur the son of shedeur.

7:36 on the fifth day shelumiel the son of zurishaddai, prince of the
children of simeon, did offer: 7:37 his offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
7:38 one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:39 one young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:40 one kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:41 and for a sacrifice
of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of
the first year: this was the offering of shelumiel the son of
zurishaddai.

7:42 on the sixth day eliasaph the son of deuel, prince of the
children of gad, offered: 7:43 his offering was one silver charger of
the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, a silver bowl of seventy
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine
flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:44 one golden spoon of
ten shekels, full of incense: 7:45 one young bullock, one ram, one
lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:46 one kid of the
goats for a sin offering: 7:47 and for a sacrifice of peace offerings,
two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this
was the offering of eliasaph the son of deuel.

7:48 on the seventh day elishama the son of ammihud, prince of the
children of ephraim, offered: 7:49 his offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
7:50 one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:51 one young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:52 one kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:53 and for a sacrifice
of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of
the first year: this was the offering of elishama the son of ammihud.

7:54 on the eighth day offered gamaliel the son of pedahzur, prince of
the children of manasseh: 7:55 his offering was one silver charger of
the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:56 one golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:57 one young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:58 one kid of
the goats for a sin offering: 7:59 and for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

7:60 on the ninth day abidan the son of gideoni, prince of the
children of benjamin, offered: 7:61 his offering was one silver
charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one
silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
7:62 one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:63 one young
bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
7:64 one kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:65 and for a sacrifice
of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of
the first year: this was the offering of abidan the son of gideoni.

7:66 on the tenth day ahiezer the son of ammishaddai, prince of the
children of dan, offered: 7:67 his offering was one silver charger,
the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl
of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:68 one
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:69 one young bullock,
one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:70 one
kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:71 and for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

7:72 on the eleventh day pagiel the son of ocran, prince of the
children of asher, offered: 7:73 his offering was one silver charger,
the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl
of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:74 one
golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:75 one young bullock,
one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:76 one
kid of the goats for a sin offering: 7:77 and for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of pagiel the son of ocran.

7:78 on the twelfth day ahira the son of enan, prince of the children
of naphtali, offered: 7:79 his offering was one silver charger, the
weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full
of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering: 7:80 one golden
spoon of ten shekels, full of incense: 7:81 one young bullock, one
ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering: 7:82 one kid of
the goats for a sin offering: 7:83 and for a sacrifice of peace
offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first
year: this was the offering of ahira the son of enan.

7:84 this was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was
anointed, by the princes of israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve
silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold: 7:85 each charger of silver
weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: all the
silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after
the shekel of the sanctuary: 7:86 the golden spoons were twelve, full
of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the
sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons was an hundred and twenty
shekels.

7:87 all the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the
rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat
offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.

7:88 and all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were
twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the
lambs of the first year sixty. this was the dedication of the altar,
after that it was anointed.

7:89 and when moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation
to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him
from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from
between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.

8:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:2 speak unto aaron and
say unto him, when thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give
light over against the candlestick.

8:3 and aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the
candlestick, as the lord commanded moses.

8:4 and this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the
shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according
unto the pattern which the lord had shewed moses, so he made the
candlestick.

8:5 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:6 take the levites from
among the children of israel, and cleanse them.

8:7 and thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: sprinkle water
of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let
them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.

8:8 then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even
fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take
for a sin offering.

8:9 and thou shalt bring the levites before the tabernacle of the
congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children
of israel together: 8:10 and thou shalt bring the levites before the
lord: and the children of israel shall put their hands upon the
levites: 8:11 and aaron shall offer the levites before the lord for an
offering of the children of israel, that they may execute the service
of the lord.

8:12 and the levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the
bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering, unto the lord, to make an atonement for
the levites.

8:13 and thou shalt set the levites before aaron, and before his sons,
and offer them for an offering unto the lord.

8:14 thus shalt thou separate the levites from among the children of
israel: and the levites shall be mine.

8:15 and after that shall the levites go in to do the service of the
tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer
them for an offering.

8:16 for they are wholly given unto me from among the children of
israel; instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the
firstborn of all the children of israel, have i taken them unto me.

8:17 for all the firstborn of the children of israel are mine, both
man and beast: on the day that i smote every firstborn in the land of
egypt i sanctified them for myself.

8:18 and i have taken the levites for all the firstborn of the
children of israel.

8:19 and i have given the levites as a gift to aaron and to his sons
from among the children of israel, to do the service of the children
of israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an
atonement for the children of israel: that there be no plague among
the children of israel, when the children of israel come nigh unto the
sanctuary.

8:20 and moses, and aaron, and all the congregation of the children of
israel, did to the levites according unto all that the lord commanded
moses concerning the levites, so did the children of israel unto them.

8:21 and the levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and
aaron offered them as an offering before the lord; and aaron made an
atonement for them to cleanse them.

8:22 and after that went the levites in to do their service in the
tabernacle of the congregation before aaron, and before his sons: as
the lord had commanded moses concerning the levites, so did they unto
them.

8:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 8:24 this is it that
belongeth unto the levites: from twenty and five years old and upward
they shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation: 8:25 and from the age of fifty years they shall cease
waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more: 8:26 but
shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the
congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. thus shalt
thou do unto the levites touching their charge.

9:1 and the lord spake unto moses in the wilderness of sinai, in the
first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of
egypt, saying, 9:2 let the children of israel also keep the passover
at his appointed season.

9:3 in the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in
his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according
to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.

9:4 and moses spake unto the children of israel, that they should keep
the passover.

9:5 and they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first
month at even in the wilderness of sinai: according to all that the
lord commanded moses, so did the children of israel.

9:6 and there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a
man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came
before moses and before aaron on that day: 9:7 and those men said unto
him, we are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept
back, that we may not offer an offering of the lord in his appointed
season among the children of israel?  9:8 and moses said unto them,
stand still, and i will hear what the lord will command concerning
you.

9:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 9:10 speak unto the
children of israel, saying, if any man of you or of your posterity
shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar
off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the lord.

9:11 the fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep
it, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.

9:12 they shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone
of it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep
it.

9:13 but the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and
forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off
from among his people: because he brought not the offering of the lord
in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.

9:14 and if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the
passover unto the lord; according to the ordinance of the passover,
and according to the manner thereof, so shall he do: ye shall have one
ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the
land.

9:15 and on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud
covered the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even
there was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until
the morning.

9:16 so it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance
of fire by night.

9:17 and when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after
that the children of israel journeyed: and in the place where the
cloud abode, there the children of israel pitched their tents.

9:18 at the commandment of the lord the children of israel journeyed,
and at the commandment of the lord they pitched: as long as the cloud
abode upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents.

9:19 and when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days,
then the children of israel kept the charge of the lord, and journeyed
not.

9:20 and so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle;
according to the commandment of the lord they abode in their tents,
and according to the commandment of the lord they journeyed.

9:21 and so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning,
and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed:
whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they
journeyed.

9:22 or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the
cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of
israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken
up, they journeyed.

9:23 at the commandment of the lord they rested in the tents, and at
the commandment of the lord they journeyed: they kept the charge of
the lord, at the commandment of the lord by the hand of moses.

10:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 10:2 make thee two
trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou
mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the
journeying of the camps.

10:3 and when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall
assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

10:4 and if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which
are heads of the thousands of israel, shall gather themselves unto
thee.

10:5 when ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts
shall go forward.

10:6 when ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on
the south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for
their journeys.

10:7 but when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall
blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.

10:8 and the sons of aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets;
and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your
generations.

10:9 and if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that
oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye
shall be remembered before the lord your god, and ye shall be saved
from your enemies.

10:10 also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and
in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over
your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings;
that they may be to you for a memorial before your god: i am the lord
your god.

10:11 and it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in
the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle
of the testimony.

10:12 and the children of israel took their journeys out of the
wilderness of sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of paran.

10:13 and they first took their journey according to the commandment
of the lord by the hand of moses.

10:14 in the first place went the standard of the camp of the children
of judah according to their armies: and over his host was nahshon the
son of amminadab.

10:15 and over the host of the tribe of the children of issachar was
nethaneel the son of zuar.

10:16 and over the host of the tribe of the children of zebulun was
eliab the son of helon.

10:17 and the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of gershon and
the sons of merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle.

10:18 and the standard of the camp of reuben set forward according to
their armies: and over his host was elizur the son of shedeur.

10:19 and over the host of the tribe of the children of simeon was
shelumiel the son of zurishaddai.

10:20 and over the host of the tribe of the children of gad was
eliasaph the son of deuel.

10:21 and the kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the
other did set up the tabernacle against they came.

10:22 and the standard of the camp of the children of ephraim set
forward according to their armies: and over his host was elishama the
son of ammihud.

10:23 and over the host of the tribe of the children of manasseh was
gamaliel the son of pedahzur.

10:24 and over the host of the tribe of the children of benjamin was
abidan the son of gideoni.

10:25 and the standard of the camp of the children of dan set forward,
which was the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and
over his host was ahiezer the son of ammishaddai.

10:26 and over the host of the tribe of the children of asher was
pagiel the son of ocran.

10:27 and over the host of the tribe of the children of naphtali was
ahira the son of enan.

10:28 thus were the journeyings of the children of israel according to
their armies, when they set forward.

10:29 and moses said unto hobab, the son of raguel the midianite,
moses' father in law, we are journeying unto the place of which the
lord said, i will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee
good: for the lord hath spoken good concerning israel.

10:30 and he said unto him, i will not go; but i will depart to mine
own land, and to my kindred.

10:31 and he said, leave us not, i pray thee; forasmuch as thou
knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to
us instead of eyes.

10:32 and it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what
goodness the lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.

10:33 and they departed from the mount of the lord three days'
journey: and the ark of the covenant of the lord went before them in
the three days' journey, to search out a resting place for them.

10:34 and the cloud of the lord was upon them by day, when they went
out of the camp.

10:35 and it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that moses said,
rise up, lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that
hate thee flee before thee.

10:36 and when it rested, he said, return, o lord, unto the many
thousands of israel.

11:1 and when the people complained, it displeased the lord: and the
lord heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the lord
burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts
of the camp.

11:2 and the people cried unto moses; and when moses prayed unto the
lord, the fire was quenched.

11:3 and he called the name of the place taberah: because the fire of
the lord burnt among them.

11:4 and the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and
the children of israel also wept again, and said, who shall give us
flesh to eat?  11:5 we remember the fish, which we did eat in egypt
freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions,
and the garlick: 11:6 but now our soul is dried away: there is nothing
at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.

11:7 and the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as
the colour of bdellium.

11:8 and the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in
mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of
it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.

11:9 and when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell
upon it.

11:10 then moses heard the people weep throughout their families,
every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the lord was
kindled greatly; moses also was displeased.

11:11 and moses said unto the lord, wherefore hast thou afflicted thy
servant? and wherefore have i not found favour in thy sight, that thou
layest the burden of all this people upon me?  11:12 have i conceived
all this people? have i begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto
me, carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking
child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?  11:13
whence should i have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep
unto me, saying, give us flesh, that we may eat.

11:14 i am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too
heavy for me.

11:15 and if thou deal thus with me, kill me, i pray thee, out of
hand, if i have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my
wretchedness.

11:16 and the lord said unto moses, gather unto me seventy men of the
elders of israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people,
and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the
congregation, that they may stand there with thee.

11:17 and i will come down and talk with thee there: and i will take
of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they
shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not
thyself alone.

11:18 and say thou unto the people, sanctify yourselves against to
morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the
lord, saying, who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us
in egypt: therefore the lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.

11:19 ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither
ten days, nor twenty days; 11:20 but even a whole month, until it come
out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye
have despised the lord which is among you, and have wept before him,
saying, why came we forth out of egypt?  11:21 and moses said, the
people, among whom i am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou
hast said, i will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.

11:22 shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice
them?  or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them,
to suffice them?  11:23 and the lord said unto moses, is the lord's
hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to
pass unto thee or not.

11:24 and moses went out, and told the people the words of the lord,
and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them
round about the tabernacle.

11:25 and the lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took
of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders:
and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they
prophesied, and did not cease.

11:26 but there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the
one was eldad, and the name of the other medad: and the spirit rested
upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out
unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.

11:27 and there ran a young man, and told moses, and said, eldad and
medad do prophesy in the camp.

11:28 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of moses, one of his
young men, answered and said, my lord moses, forbid them.

11:29 and moses said unto him, enviest thou for my sake? would god
that all the lord's people were prophets, and that the lord would put
his spirit upon them!  11:30 and moses gat him into the camp, he and
the elders of israel.

11:31 and there went forth a wind from the lord, and brought quails
from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day's
journey on this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other
side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the
face of the earth.

11:32 and the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and
all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least
gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves
round about the camp.

11:33 and while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was
chewed, the wrath of the lord was kindled against the people, and the
lord smote the people with a very great plague.

11:34 and he called the name of that place kibrothhattaavah: because
there they buried the people that lusted.

11:35 and the people journeyed from kibrothhattaavah unto hazeroth;
and abode at hazeroth.

12:1 and miriam and aaron spake against moses because of the ethiopian
woman whom he had married: for he had married an ethiopian woman.

12:2 and they said, hath the lord indeed spoken only by moses? hath he
not spoken also by us? and the lord heard it.

12:3 (now the man moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth.)  12:4 and the lord spake suddenly unto
moses, and unto aaron, and unto miriam, come out ye three unto the
tabernacle of the congregation. and they three came out.

12:5 and the lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in
the door of the tabernacle, and called aaron and miriam: and they both
came forth.

12:6 and he said, hear now my words: if there be a prophet among you,
i the lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream.

12:7 my servant moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

12:8 with him will i speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in
dark speeches; and the similitude of the lord shall he behold:
wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant moses?
12:9 and the anger of the lord was kindled against them; and he
departed.

12:10 and the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold,
miriam became leprous, white as snow: and aaron looked upon miriam,
and, behold, she was leprous.

12:11 and aaron said unto moses, alas, my lord, i beseech thee, lay
not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we
have sinned.

12:12 let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed
when he cometh out of his mother's womb.

12:13 and moses cried unto the lord, saying, heal her now, o god, i
beseech thee.

12:14 and the lord said unto moses, if her father had but spit in her
face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from
the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.

12:15 and miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people
journeyed not till miriam was brought in again.

12:16 and afterward the people removed from hazeroth, and pitched in
the wilderness of paran.

13:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 13:2 send thou men, that
they may search the land of canaan, which i give unto the children of
israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one
a ruler among them.

13:3 and moses by the commandment of the lord sent them from the
wilderness of paran: all those men were heads of the children of
israel.

13:4 and these were their names: of the tribe of reuben, shammua the
son of zaccur.

13:5 of the tribe of simeon, shaphat the son of hori.

13:6 of the tribe of judah, caleb the son of jephunneh.

13:7 of the tribe of issachar, igal the son of joseph.

13:8 of the tribe of ephraim, oshea the son of nun.

13:9 of the tribe of benjamin, palti the son of raphu.

13:10 of the tribe of zebulun, gaddiel the son of sodi.

13:11 of the tribe of joseph, namely, of the tribe of manasseh, gaddi
the son of susi.

13:12 of the tribe of dan, ammiel the son of gemalli.

13:13 of the tribe of asher, sethur the son of michael.

13:14 of the tribe of naphtali, nahbi the son of vophsi.

13:15 of the tribe of gad, geuel the son of machi.

13:16 these are the names of the men which moses sent to spy out the
land.

and moses called oshea the son of nun jehoshua.

13:17 and moses sent them to spy out the land of canaan, and said unto
them, get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:
13:18 and see the land, what it is, and the people that dwelleth
therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; 13:19 and what
the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what
cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong
holds; 13:20 and what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether
there be wood therein, or not. and be ye of good courage, and bring of
the fruit of the land. now the time was the time of the firstripe
grapes.

13:21 so they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of
zin unto rehob, as men come to hamath.

13:22 and they ascended by the south, and came unto hebron; where
ahiman, sheshai, and talmai, the children of anak, were. (now hebron
was built seven years before zoan in egypt.)  13:23 and they came unto
the brook of eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one
cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they
brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.

13:24 the place was called the brook eshcol, because of the cluster of
grapes which the children of israel cut down from thence.

13:25 and they returned from searching of the land after forty days.

13:26 and they went and came to moses, and to aaron, and to all the
congregation of the children of israel, unto the wilderness of paran,
to kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the
congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.

13:27 and they told him, and said, we came unto the land whither thou
sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the
fruit of it.

13:28 nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and
the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the
children of anak there.

13:29 the amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the hittites,
and the jebusites, and the amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the
canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of jordan.

13:30 and caleb stilled the people before moses, and said, let us go
up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.

13:31 but the men that went up with him said, we be not able to go up
against the people; for they are stronger than we.

13:32 and they brought up an evil report of the land which they had
searched unto the children of israel, saying, the land, through which
we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants
thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great
stature.

13:33 and there we saw the giants, the sons of anak, which come of the
giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight.

14:1 and all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and
the people wept that night.

14:2 and all the children of israel murmured against moses and against
aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, would god that we
had died in the land of egypt! or would god we had died in this
wilderness!  14:3 and wherefore hath the lord brought us unto this
land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be
a prey? were it not better for us to return into egypt?  14:4 and they
said one to another, let us make a captain, and let us return into
egypt.

14:5 then moses and aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly
of the congregation of the children of israel.

14:6 and joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes: 14:7 and they
spake unto all the company of the children of israel, saying, the
land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good land.

14:8 if the lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land,
and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.

14:9 only rebel not ye against the lord, neither fear ye the people of
the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from
them, and the lord is with us: fear them not.

14:10 but all the congregation bade stone them with stones. and the
glory of the lord appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation
before all the children of israel.

14:11 and the lord said unto moses, how long will this people provoke
me?  and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs
which i have shewed among them?  14:12 i will smite them with the
pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater
nation and mightier than they.

14:13 and moses said unto the lord, then the egyptians shall hear it,
(for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)
14:14 and they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they
have heard that thou lord art among this people, that thou lord art
seen face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that
thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a
pillar of fire by night.

14:15 now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man, then the
nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, 14:16
because the lord was not able to bring this people into the land which
he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.

14:17 and now, i beseech thee, let the power of my lord be great,
according as thou hast spoken, saying, 14:18 the lord is
longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation.

14:19 pardon, i beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according
unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this
people, from egypt even until now.

14:20 and the lord said, i have pardoned according to thy word: 14:21
but as truly as i live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory
of the lord.

14:22 because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles,
which i did in egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice; 14:23 surely they
shall not see the land which i sware unto their fathers, neither shall
any of them that provoked me see it: 14:24 but my servant caleb,
because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully,
him will i bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall
possess it.

14:25 (now the amalekites and the canaanites dwelt in the valley.)
tomorrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the
red sea.

14:26 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 14:27 how
long shall i bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against
me? i have heard the murmurings of the children of israel, which they
murmur against me.

14:28 say unto them, as truly as i live, saith the lord, as ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will i do to you: 14:29 your carcases shall
fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according
to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have
murmured against me.

14:30 doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which i
sware to make you dwell therein, save caleb the son of jephunneh, and
joshua the son of nun.

14:31 but your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will
i bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.

14:32 but as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this
wilderness.

14:33 and your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years,
and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the
wilderness.

14:34 after the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even
forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even
forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.

14:35 i the lord have said, i will surely do it unto all this evil
congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

14:36 and the men, which moses sent to search the land, who returned,
and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a
slander upon the land, 14:37 even those men that did bring up the evil
report upon the land, died by the plague before the lord.

14:38 but joshua the son of nun, and caleb the son of jephunneh, which
were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.

14:39 and moses told these sayings unto all the children of israel:
and the people mourned greatly.

14:40 and they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the
top of the mountain, saying, lo, we be here, and will go up unto the
place which the lord hath promised: for we have sinned.

14:41 and moses said, wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment
of the lord? but it shall not prosper.

14:42 go not up, for the lord is not among you; that ye be not smitten
before your enemies.

14:43 for the amalekites and the canaanites are there before you, and
ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the lord,
therefore the lord will not be with you.

14:44 but they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the
ark of the covenant of the lord, and moses, departed not out of the
camp.

14:45 then the amalekites came down, and the canaanites which dwelt in
that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto hormah.

15:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come into the land
of your habitations, which i give unto you, 15:3 and will make an
offering by fire unto the lord, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in
performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts,
to make a sweet savour unto the lord, of the herd or of the flock:
15:4 then shall he that offereth his offering unto the lord bring a
meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of
an hin of oil.

15:5 and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt
thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.

15:6 or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two tenth
deals of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil.

15:7 and for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an
hin of wine, for a sweet savour unto the lord.

15:8 and when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a
sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the lord: 15:9
then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth
deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.

15:10 and thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine,
for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

15:11 thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a
lamb, or a kid.

15:12 according to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to
every one according to their number.

15:13 all that are born of the country shall do these things after
this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour
unto the lord.

15:14 and if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in
your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the lord; as ye do, so he shall do.

15:15 one ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and
also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever
in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the
lord.

15:16 one law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you.

15:17 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:18 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the land
whither i bring you, 15:19 then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the lord.

15:20 ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave
offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall
ye heave it.

15:21 of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the lord an heave
offering in your generations.

15:22 and if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments,
which the lord hath spoken unto moses, 15:23 even all that the lord
hath commanded you by the hand of moses, from the day that the lord
commanded moses, and henceforward among your generations; 15:24 then
it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge
of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young
bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the lord, with
his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the manner,
and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.

15:25 and the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation
of the children of israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is
ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by
fire unto the lord, and their sin offering before the lord, for their
ignorance: 15:26 and it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the
children of israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them;
seeing all the people were in ignorance.

15:27 and if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she
goat of the first year for a sin offering.

15:28 and the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth
ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the lord, to make an
atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.

15:29 ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance,
both for him that is born among the children of israel, and for the
stranger that sojourneth among them.

15:30 but the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the lord; and that
soul shall be cut off from among his people.

15:31 because he hath despised the word of the lord, and hath broken
his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity
shall be upon him.

15:32 and while the children of israel were in the wilderness, they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.

15:33 and they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto moses
and aaron, and unto all the congregation.

15:34 and they put him in ward, because it was not declared what
should be done to him.

15:35 and the lord said unto moses, the man shall be surely put to
death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the
camp.

15:36 and all the congregation brought him without the camp, and
stoned him with stones, and he died; as the lord commanded moses.

15:37 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 15:38 speak unto the
children of israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the
borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they
put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue: 15:39 and it
shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember
all the commandments of the lord, and do them; and that ye seek not
after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a
whoring: 15:40 that ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and
be holy unto your god.

15:41 i am the lord your god, which brought you out of the land of
egypt, to be your god: i am the lord your god.

16:1 now korah, the son of izhar, the son of kohath, the son of levi,
and dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab, and on, the son of peleth,
sons of reuben, took men: 16:2 and they rose up before moses, with
certain of the children of israel, two hundred and fifty princes of
the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 16:3 and they
gathered themselves together against moses and against aaron, and said
unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the lord is among them: wherefore then
lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the lord?  16:4 and
when moses heard it, he fell upon his face: 16:5 and he spake unto
korah and unto all his company, saying, even to morrow the lord will
shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near
unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto
him.

16:6 this do; take you censers, korah, and all his company; 16:7 and
put fire therein, and put incense in them before the lord to morrow:
and it shall be that the man whom the lord doth choose, he shall be
holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of levi.

16:8 and moses said unto korah, hear, i pray you, ye sons of levi:
16:9 seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the god of israel
hath separated you from the congregation of israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the lord, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them?  16:10 and he
hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of levi
with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?  16:11 for which cause
both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the lord:
and what is aaron, that ye murmur against him?  16:12 and moses sent
to call dathan and abiram, the sons of eliab: which said, we will not
come up: 16:13 is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of
a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?  16:14 moreover
thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey,
or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the
eyes of these men? we will not come up.

16:15 and moses was very wroth, and said unto the lord, respect not
thou their offering: i have not taken one ass from them, neither have
i hurt one of them.

16:16 and moses said unto korah, be thou and all thy company before
the lord, thou, and they, and aaron, to morrow: 16:17 and take every
man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the lord
every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and
aaron, each of you his censer.

16:18 and they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and
laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation with moses and aaron.

16:19 and korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the lord
appeared unto all the congregation.

16:20 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 16:21
separate yourselves from among this congregation, that i may consume
them in a moment.

16:22 and they fell upon their faces, and said, o god, the god of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with
all the congregation?  16:23 and the lord spake unto moses, saying,
16:24 speak unto the congregation, saying, get you up from about the
tabernacle of korah, dathan, and abiram.

16:25 and moses rose up and went unto dathan and abiram; and the
elders of israel followed him.

16:26 and he spake unto the congregation, saying, depart, i pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of their's, lest
ye be consumed in all their sins.

16:27 so they gat up from the tabernacle of korah, dathan, and abiram,
on every side: and dathan and abiram came out, and stood in the door
of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little
children.

16:28 and moses said, hereby ye shall know that the lord hath sent me
to do all these works; for i have not done them of mine own mind.

16:29 if these men die the common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men; then the lord hath not sent
me.

16:30 but if the lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go
down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have
provoked the lord.

16:31 and it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these
words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them: 16:32 and
the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all the men that appertained unto korah, and all their goods.

16:33 they, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the
congregation.

16:34 and all israel that were round about them fled at the cry of
them: for they said, lest the earth swallow us up also.

16:35 and there came out a fire from the lord, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered incense.

16:36 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:37 speak unto eleazar
the son of aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the
burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.

16:38 the censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them
make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered
them before the lord, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a
sign unto the children of israel.

16:39 and eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they
that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a
covering of the altar: 16:40 to be a memorial unto the children of
israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of aaron, come near
to offer incense before the lord; that he be not as korah, and as his
company: as the lord said to him by the hand of moses.

16:41 but on the morrow all the congregation of the children of israel
murmured against moses and against aaron, saying, ye have killed the
people of the lord.

16:42 and it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
moses and against aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the
lord appeared.

16:43 and moses and aaron came before the tabernacle of the
congregation.

16:44 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 16:45 get you up from
among this congregation, that i may consume them as in a moment. and
they fell upon their faces.

16:46 and moses said unto aaron, take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the
congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone
out from the lord; the plague is begun.

16:47 and aaron took as moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and
he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

16:48 and he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was
stayed.

16:49 now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and
seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of korah.

16:50 and aaron returned unto moses unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation: and the plague was stayed.

17:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 17:2 speak unto the
children of israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to
the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the
house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon
his rod.

17:3 and thou shalt write aaron's name upon the rod of levi: for one
rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.

17:4 and thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
before the testimony, where i will meet with you.

17:5 and it shall come to pass, that the man's rod, whom i shall
choose, shall blossom: and i will make to cease from me the murmurings
of the children of israel, whereby they murmur against you.

17:6 and moses spake unto the children of israel, and every one of
their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to
their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of aaron was
among their rods.

17:7 and moses laid up the rods before the lord in the tabernacle of
witness.

17:8 and it came to pass, that on the morrow moses went into the
tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of aaron for the house of
levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and
yielded almonds.

17:9 and moses brought out all the rods from before the lord unto all
the children of israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.

17:10 and the lord said unto moses, bring aaron's rod again before the
testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt
quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.

17:11 and moses did so: as the lord commanded him, so did he.

17:12 and the children of israel spake unto moses, saying, behold, we
die, we perish, we all perish.

17:13 whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the lord
shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?  18:1 and the lord said
unto aaron, thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thee shall
bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee
shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.

18:2 and thy brethren also of the tribe of levi, the tribe of thy
father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and
minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister
before the tabernacle of witness.

18:3 and they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the
tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary
and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.

18:4 and they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the
tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle:
and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.

18:5 and ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of
the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of
israel.

18:6 and i, behold, i have taken your brethren the levites from among
the children of israel: to you they are given as a gift for the lord,
to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:7 therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's
office for everything of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall
serve: i have given your priest's office unto you as a service of
gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

18:8 and the lord spake unto aaron, behold, i also have given thee the
charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the
children of israel; unto thee have i given them by reason of the
anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.

18:9 this shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the
fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and
every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs
which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and for
thy sons.

18:10 in the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat
it: it shall be holy unto thee.

18:11 and this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all
the wave offerings of the children of israel: i have given them unto
thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for
ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.

18:12 all the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of
the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the
lord, them have i given thee.

18:13 and whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring
unto the lord, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house
shall eat of it.

18:14 every thing devoted in israel shall be thine.

18:15 every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they
bring unto the lord, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine:
nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the
firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.

18:16 and those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou
redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.

18:17 but the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the
firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt
sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an
offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the lord.

18:18 and the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as
the right shoulder are thine.

18:19 all the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children
of israel offer unto the lord, have i given thee, and thy sons and thy
daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt
for ever before the lord unto thee and to thy seed with thee.

18:20 and the lord spake unto aaron, thou shalt have no inheritance in
their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: i am thy part
and thine inheritance among the children of israel.

18:21 and, behold, i have given the children of levi all the tenth in
israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even
the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.

18:22 neither must the children of israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

18:23 but the levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a
statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children
of israel they have no inheritance.

18:24 but the tithes of the children of israel, which they offer as an
heave offering unto the lord, i have given to the levites to inherit:
therefore i have said unto them, among the children of israel they
shall have no inheritance.

18:25 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 18:26 thus speak unto the
levites, and say unto them, when ye take of the children of israel the
tithes which i have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye
shall offer up an heave offering of it for the lord, even a tenth part
of the tithe.

18:27 and this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as
though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of
the winepress.

18:28 thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the lord of all
your tithes, which ye receive of the children of israel; and ye shall
give thereof the lord's heave offering to aaron the priest.

18:29 out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the
lord, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of
it.

18:30 therefore thou shalt say unto them, when ye have heaved the best
thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the levites as the
increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.

18:31 and ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for
it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

18:32 and ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved
from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of
the children of israel, lest ye die.

19:1 and the lord spake unto moses and unto aaron, saying, 19:2 this
is the ordinance of the law which the lord hath commanded, saying,
speak unto the children of israel, that they bring thee a red heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:
19:3 and ye shall give her unto eleazar the priest, that he may bring
her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:
19:4 and eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,
and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the
congregation seven times: 19:5 and one shall burn the heifer in his
sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he
burn: 19:6 and the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and
scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.

19:7 then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his
flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the
priest shall be unclean until the even.

19:8 and he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and
bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.

19:9 and a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer,
and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be
kept for the congregation of the children of israel for a water of
separation: it is a purification for sin.

19:10 and he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his
clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the
children of israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them,
for a statute for ever.

19:11 he that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven
days.

19:12 he shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the
seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third
day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.

19:13 whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and
purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the lord; and that
soul shall be cut off from israel: because the water of separation was
not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet
upon him.

19:14 this is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into
the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.

19:15 and every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is
unclean.

19:16 and whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the
open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be
unclean seven days.

19:17 and for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the
burnt heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put
thereto in a vessel: 19:18 and a clean person shall take hyssop, and
dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the
vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that
touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave: 19:19 and the
clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on
the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at
even.

19:20 but the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself,
that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he
hath defiled the sanctuary of the lord: the water of separation hath
not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.

19:21 and it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that
sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that
toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.

19:22 and whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and
the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.

20:1 then came the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
into the desert of zin in the first month: and the people abode in
kadesh; and miriam died there, and was buried there.

20:2 and there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered
themselves together against moses and against aaron.

20:3 and the people chode with moses, and spake, saying, would god
that we had died when our brethren died before the lord!  20:4 and why
have ye brought up the congregation of the lord into this wilderness,
that we and our cattle should die there?  20:5 and wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place?
it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates;
neither is there any water to drink.

20:6 and moses and aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon
their faces: and the glory of the lord appeared unto them.

20:7 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 20:8 take the rod, and
gather thou the assembly together, thou, and aaron thy brother, and
speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his
water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so
thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.

20:9 and moses took the rod from before the lord, as he commanded him.

20:10 and moses and aaron gathered the congregation together before
the rock, and he said unto them, hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch
you water out of this rock?  20:11 and moses lifted up his hand, and
with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out
abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.

20:12 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron, because ye believed me
not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of israel, therefore
ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which i have given
them.

20:13 this is the water of meribah; because the children of israel
strove with the lord, and he was sanctified in them.

20:14 and moses sent messengers from kadesh unto the king of edom,
thus saith thy brother israel, thou knowest all the travail that hath
befallen us: 20:15 how our fathers went down into egypt, and we have
dwelt in egypt a long time; and the egyptians vexed us, and our
fathers: 20:16 and when we cried unto the lord, he heard our voice,
and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of egypt: and,
behold, we are in kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border: 20:17
let us pass, i pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass
through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of
the water of the wells: we will go by the king's high way, we will not
turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy
borders.

20:18 and edom said unto him, thou shalt not pass by me, lest i come
out against thee with the sword.

20:19 and the children of israel said unto him, we will go by the high
way: and if i and my cattle drink of thy water, then i will pay for
it: i will only, without doing anything else, go through on my feet.

20:20 and he said, thou shalt not go through. and edom came out
against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

20:21 thus edom refused to give israel passage through his border:
wherefore israel turned away from him.

20:22 and the children of israel, even the whole congregation,
journeyed from kadesh, and came unto mount hor.

20:23 and the lord spake unto moses and aaron in mount hor, by the
coast of the land of edom, saying, 20:24 aaron shall be gathered unto
his people: for he shall not enter into the land which i have given
unto the children of israel, because ye rebelled against my word at
the water of meribah.

20:25 take aaron and eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount
hor: 20:26 and strip aaron of his garments, and put them upon eleazar
his son: and aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die
there.

20:27 and moses did as the lord commanded: and they went up into mount
hor in the sight of all the congregation.

20:28 and moses stripped aaron of his garments, and put them upon
eleazar his son; and aaron died there in the top of the mount: and
moses and eleazar came down from the mount.

20:29 and when all the congregation saw that aaron was dead, they
mourned for aaron thirty days, even all the house of israel.

21:1 and when king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against
israel, and took some of them prisoners.

21:2 and israel vowed a vow unto the lord, and said, if thou wilt
indeed deliver this people into my hand, then i will utterly destroy
their cities.

21:3 and the lord hearkened to the voice of israel, and delivered up
the canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and
he called the name of the place hormah.

21:4 and they journeyed from mount hor by the way of the red sea, to
compass the land of edom: and the soul of the people was much
discouraged because of the way.

21:5 and the people spake against god, and against moses, wherefore
have ye brought us up out of egypt to die in the wilderness? for there
is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this
light bread.

21:6 and the lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit
the people; and much people of israel died.

21:7 therefore the people came to moses, and said, we have sinned, for
we have spoken against the lord, and against thee; pray unto the lord,
that he take away the serpents from us. and moses prayed for the
people.

21:8 and the lord said unto moses, make thee a fiery serpent, and set
it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is
bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.

21:9 and moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it
came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the
serpent of brass, he lived.

21:10 and the children of israel set forward, and pitched in oboth.

21:11 and they journeyed from oboth, and pitched at ijeabarim, in the
wilderness which is before moab, toward the sunrising.

21:12 from thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of zared.

21:13 from thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of
arnon, which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the
amorites: for arnon is the border of moab, between moab and the
amorites.

21:14 wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the lord, what
he did in the red sea, and in the brooks of arnon, 21:15 and at the
stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of ar, and lieth
upon the border of moab.

21:16 and from thence they went to beer: that is the well whereof the
lord spake unto moses, gather the people together, and i will give
them water.

21:17 then israel sang this song, spring up, o well; sing ye unto it:
21:18 the princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it,
by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. and from the
wilderness they went to mattanah: 21:19 and from mattanah to nahaliel:
and from nahaliel to bamoth: 21:20 and from bamoth in the valley, that
is in the country of moab, to the top of pisgah, which looketh toward
jeshimon.

21:21 and israel sent messengers unto sihon king of the amorites,
saying, 21:22 let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the
fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink of the waters of the
well: but we will go along by the king's high way, until we be past
thy borders.

21:23 and sihon would not suffer israel to pass through his border:
but sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against
israel into the wilderness: and he came to jahaz, and fought against
israel.

21:24 and israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed
his land from arnon unto jabbok, even unto the children of ammon: for
the border of the children of ammon was strong.

21:25 and israel took all these cities: and israel dwelt in all the
cities of the amorites, in heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.

21:26 for heshbon was the city of sihon the king of the amorites, who
had fought against the former king of moab, and taken all his land out
of his hand, even unto arnon.

21:27 wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, come into heshbon,
let the city of sihon be built and prepared: 21:28 for there is a fire
gone out of heshbon, a flame from the city of sihon: it hath consumed
ar of moab, and the lords of the high places of arnon.

21:29 woe to thee, moab! thou art undone, o people of chemosh: he hath
given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto
sihon king of the amorites.

21:30 we have shot at them; heshbon is perished even unto dibon, and
we have laid them waste even unto nophah, which reacheth unto medeba.

21:31 thus israel dwelt in the land of the amorites.

21:32 and moses sent to spy out jaazer, and they took the villages
thereof, and drove out the amorites that were there.

21:33 and they turned and went up by the way of bashan: and og the
king of bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the
battle at edrei.

21:34 and the lord said unto moses, fear him not: for i have delivered
him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do
to him as thou didst unto sihon king of the amorites, which dwelt at
heshbon.

21:35 so they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there
was none left him alive: and they possessed his land.

22:1 and the children of israel set forward, and pitched in the plains
of moab on this side jordan by jericho.

22:2 and balak the son of zippor saw all that israel had done to the
amorites.

22:3 and moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many:
and moab was distressed because of the children of israel.

22:4 and moab said unto the elders of midian, now shall this company
lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of
the field.

and balak the son of zippor was king of the moabites at that time.

22:5 he sent messengers therefore unto balaam the son of beor to
pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his
people, to call him, saying, behold, there is a people come out from
egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over
against me: 22:6 come now therefore, i pray thee, curse me this
people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure i shall prevail,
that we may smite them, and that i may drive them out of the land: for
i wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest
is cursed.

22:7 and the elders of moab and the elders of midian departed with the
rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto balaam, and
spake unto him the words of balak.

22:8 and he said unto them, lodge here this night, and i will bring
you word again, as the lord shall speak unto me: and the princes of
moab abode with balaam.

22:9 and god came unto balaam, and said, what men are these with thee?
22:10 and balaam said unto god, balak the son of zippor, king of moab,
hath sent unto me, saying, 22:11 behold, there is a people come out of
egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them;
peradventure i shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.

22:12 and god said unto balaam, thou shalt not go with them; thou
shalt not curse the people: for they are blessed.

22:13 and balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of
balak, get you into your land: for the lord refuseth to give me leave
to go with you.

22:14 and the princes of moab rose up, and they went unto balak, and
said, balaam refuseth to come with us.

22:15 and balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than
they.

22:16 and they came to balaam, and said to him, thus saith balak the
son of zippor, let nothing, i pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto
me: 22:17 for i will promote thee unto very great honour, and i will
do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, i pray thee, curse
me this people.

22:18 and balaam answered and said unto the servants of balak, if
balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, i cannot go
beyond the word of the lord my god, to do less or more.

22:19 now therefore, i pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that i
may know what the lord will say unto me more.

22:20 and god came unto balaam at night, and said unto him, if the men
come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which i
shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.

22:21 and balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went
with the princes of moab.

22:22 and god's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of
the lord stood in the way for an adversary against him. now he was
riding upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.

22:23 and the ass saw the angel of the lord standing in the way, and
his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way,
and went into the field: and balaam smote the ass, to turn her into
the way.

22:24 but the angel of the lord stood in a path of the vineyards, a
wall being on this side, and a wall on that side.

22:25 and when the ass saw the angel of the lord, she thrust herself
unto the wall, and crushed balaam's foot against the wall: and he
smote her again.

22:26 and the angel of the lord went further, and stood in a narrow
place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the
left.

22:27 and when the ass saw the angel of the lord, she fell down under
balaam: and balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a
staff.

22:28 and the lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto
balaam, what have i done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these
three times?  22:29 and balaam said unto the ass, because thou hast
mocked me: i would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would i
kill thee.

22:30 and the ass said unto balaam, am not i thine ass, upon which
thou hast ridden ever since i was thine unto this day? was i ever wont
to do so unto thee? and he said, nay.

22:31 then the lord opened the eyes of balaam, and he saw the angel of
the lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he
bowed down his head, and fell flat on his face.

22:32 and the angel of the lord said unto him, wherefore hast thou
smitten thine ass these three times? behold, i went out to withstand
thee, because thy way is perverse before me: 22:33 and the ass saw me,
and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from me,
surely now also i had slain thee, and saved her alive.

22:34 and balaam said unto the angel of the lord, i have sinned; for i
knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if
it displease thee, i will get me back again.

22:35 and the angel of the lord said unto balaam, go with the men: but
only the word that i shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. so
balaam went with the princes of balak.

22:36 and when balak heard that balaam was come, he went out to meet
him unto a city of moab, which is in the border of arnon, which is in
the utmost coast.

22:37 and balak said unto balaam, did i not earnestly send unto thee
to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am i not able indeed
to promote thee to honour?  22:38 and balaam said unto balak, lo, i am
come unto thee: have i now any power at all to say any thing? the word
that god putteth in my mouth, that shall i speak.

22:39 and balaam went with balak, and they came unto kirjathhuzoth.

22:40 and balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to balaam, and to the
princes that were with him.

22:41 and it came to pass on the morrow, that balak took balaam, and
brought him up into the high places of baal, that thence he might see
the utmost part of the people.

23:1 and balaam said unto balak, build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.

23:2 and balak did as balaam had spoken; and balak and balaam offered
on every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:3 and balaam said unto balak, stand by thy burnt offering, and i
will go: peradventure the lord will come to meet me: and whatsoever he
sheweth me i will tell thee. and he went to an high place.

23:4 and god met balaam: and he said unto him, i have prepared seven
altars, and i have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.

23:5 and the lord put a word in balaam's mouth, and said, return unto
balak, and thus thou shalt speak.

23:6 and he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt
sacrifice, he, and all the princes of moab.

23:7 and he took up his parable, and said, balak the king of moab hath
brought me from aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, come,
curse me jacob, and come, defy israel.

23:8 how shall i curse, whom god hath not cursed? or how shall i defy,
whom the lord hath not defied?  23:9 for from the top of the rocks i
see him, and from the hills i behold him: lo, the people shall dwell
alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.

23:10 who can count the dust of jacob, and the number of the fourth
part of israel? let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his!  23:11 and balak said unto balaam, what hast thou
done unto me? i took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou
hast blessed them altogether.

23:12 and he answered and said, must i not take heed to speak that
which the lord hath put in my mouth?  23:13 and balak said unto him,
come, i pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest
see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not
see them all: and curse me them from thence.

23:14 and he brought him into the field of zophim, to the top of
pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on
every altar.

23:15 and he said unto balak, stand here by thy burnt offering, while
i meet the lord yonder.

23:16 and the lord met balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said,
go again unto balak, and say thus.

23:17 and when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering,
and the princes of moab with him. and balak said unto him, what hath
the lord spoken?  23:18 and he took up his parable, and said, rise up,
balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of zippor: 23:19 god is not
a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and
shall he not make it good?  23:20 behold, i have received commandment
to bless: and he hath blessed; and i cannot reverse it.

23:21 he hath not beheld iniquity in jacob, neither hath he seen
perverseness in israel: the lord his god is with him, and the shout of
a king is among them.

23:22 god brought them out of egypt; he hath as it were the strength
of an unicorn.

23:23 surely there is no enchantment against jacob, neither is there
any divination against israel: according to this time it shall be said
of jacob and of israel, what hath god wrought!  23:24 behold, the
people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young
lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the
blood of the slain.

23:25 and balak said unto balaam, neither curse them at all, nor bless
them at all.

23:26 but balaam answered and said unto balak, told not i thee,
saying, all that the lord speaketh, that i must do?  23:27 and balak
said unto balaam, come, i pray thee, i will bring thee unto another
place; peradventure it will please god that thou mayest curse me them
from thence.

23:28 and balak brought balaam unto the top of peor, that looketh
toward jeshimon.

23:29 and balaam said unto balak, build me here seven altars, and
prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

23:30 and balak did as balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a
ram on every altar.

24:1 and when balaam saw that it pleased the lord to bless israel, he
went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his
face toward the wilderness.

24:2 and balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw israel abiding in his
tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of god came upon him.

24:3 and he took up his parable, and said, balaam the son of beor hath
said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:4 he hath said,
which heard the words of god, which saw the vision of the almighty,
falling into a trance, but having his eyes open: 24:5 how goodly are
thy tents, o jacob, and thy tabernacles, o israel!  24:6 as the
valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the
trees of lign aloes which the lord hath planted, and as cedar trees
beside the waters.

24:7 he shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be
in many waters, and his king shall be higher than agag, and his
kingdom shall be exalted.

24:8 god brought him forth out of egypt; he hath as it were the
strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and
shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.

24:9 he couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall
stir him up? blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
curseth thee.

24:10 and balak's anger was kindled against balaam, and he smote his
hands together: and balak said unto balaam, i called thee to curse
mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these
three times.

24:11 therefore now flee thou to thy place: i thought to promote thee
unto great honour; but, lo, the lord hath kept thee back from honour.

24:12 and balaam said unto balak, spake i not also to thy messengers
which thou sentest unto me, saying, 24:13 if balak would give me his
house full of silver and gold, i cannot go beyond the commandment of
the lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the lord
saith, that will i speak?  24:14 and now, behold, i go unto my people:
come therefore, and i will advertise thee what this people shall do to
thy people in the latter days.

24:15 and he took up his parable, and said, balaam the son of beor
hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 24:16 he hath
said, which heard the words of god, and knew the knowledge of the most
high, which saw the vision of the almighty, falling into a trance, but
having his eyes open: 24:17 i shall see him, but not now: i shall
behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a star out of jacob, and a
sceptre shall rise out of israel, and shall smite the corners of moab,
and destroy all the children of sheth.

24:18 and edom shall be a possession, seir also shall be a possession
for his enemies; and israel shall do valiantly.

24:19 out of jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
destroy him that remaineth of the city.

24:20 and when he looked on amalek, he took up his parable, and said,
amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that
he perish for ever.

24:21 and he looked on the kenites, and took up his parable, and said,
strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.

24:22 nevertheless the kenite shall be wasted, until asshur shall
carry thee away captive.

24:23 and he took up his parable, and said, alas, who shall live when
god doeth this!  24:24 and ships shall come from the coast of chittim,
and shall afflict asshur, and shall afflict eber, and he also shall
perish for ever.

24:25 and balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and
balak also went his way.

25:1 and israel abode in shittim, and the people began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of moab.

25:2 and they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and
the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.

25:3 and israel joined himself unto baalpeor: and the anger of the
lord was kindled against israel.

25:4 and the lord said unto moses, take all the heads of the people,
and hang them up before the lord against the sun, that the fierce
anger of the lord may be turned away from israel.

25:5 and moses said unto the judges of israel, slay ye every one his
men that were joined unto baalpeor.

25:6 and, behold, one of the children of israel came and brought unto
his brethren a midianitish woman in the sight of moses, and in the
sight of all the congregation of the children of israel, who were
weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

25:7 and when phinehas, the son of eleazar, the son of aaron the
priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a
javelin in his hand; 25:8 and he went after the man of israel into the
tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of israel, and the
woman through her belly. so the plague was stayed from the children of
israel.

25:9 and those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.

25:10 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:11 phinehas, the son
of eleazar, the son of aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away
from the children of israel, while he was zealous for my sake among
them, that i consumed not the children of israel in my jealousy.

25:12 wherefore say, behold, i give unto him my covenant of peace:
25:13 and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant
of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his god, and
made an atonement for the children of israel.

25:14 now the name of the israelite that was slain, even that was
slain with the midianitish woman, was zimri, the son of salu, a prince
of a chief house among the simeonites.

25:15 and the name of the midianitish woman that was slain was cozbi,
the daughter of zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house
in midian.

25:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 25:17 vex the midianites,
and smite them: 25:18 for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguiled you in the matter of peor, and in the matter of
cozbi, the daughter of a prince of midian, their sister, which was
slain in the day of the plague for peor's sake.

26:1 and it came to pass after the plague, that the lord spake unto
moses and unto eleazar the son of aaron the priest, saying, 26:2 take
the sum of all the congregation of the children of israel, from twenty
years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, all that are
able to go to war in israel.

26:3 and moses and eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of
moab by jordan near jericho, saying, 26:4 take the sum of the people,
from twenty years old and upward; as the lord commanded moses and the
children of israel, which went forth out of the land of egypt.

26:5 reuben, the eldest son of israel: the children of reuben; hanoch,
of whom cometh the family of the hanochites: of pallu, the family of
the palluites: 26:6 of hezron, the family of the hezronites: of carmi,
the family of the carmites.

26:7 these are the families of the reubenites: and they that were
numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and
thirty.

26:8 and the sons of pallu; eliab.

26:9 and the sons of eliab; nemuel, and dathan, and abiram. this is
that dathan and abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who
strove against moses and against aaron in the company of korah, when
they strove against the lord: 26:10 and the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up together with korah, when that company died,
what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became
a sign.

26:11 notwithstanding the children of korah died not.

26:12 the sons of simeon after their families: of nemuel, the family
of the nemuelites: of jamin, the family of the jaminites: of jachin,
the family of the jachinites: 26:13 of zerah, the family of the
zarhites: of shaul, the family of the shaulites.

26:14 these are the families of the simeonites, twenty and two
thousand and two hundred.

26:15 the children of gad after their families: of zephon, the family
of the zephonites: of haggi, the family of the haggites: of shuni, the
family of the shunites: 26:16 of ozni, the family of the oznites: of
eri, the family of the erites: 26:17 of arod, the family of the
arodites: of areli, the family of the arelites.

26:18 these are the families of the children of gad according to those
that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.

26:19 the sons of judah were er and onan: and er and onan died in the
land of canaan.

26:20 and the sons of judah after their families were; of shelah, the
family of the shelanites: of pharez, the family of the pharzites: of
zerah, the family of the zarhites.

26:21 and the sons of pharez were; of hezron, the family of the
hezronites: of hamul, the family of the hamulites.

26:22 these are the families of judah according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.

26:23 of the sons of issachar after their families: of tola, the
family of the tolaites: of pua, the family of the punites: 26:24 of
jashub, the family of the jashubites: of shimron, the family of the
shimronites.

26:25 these are the families of issachar according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.

26:26 of the sons of zebulun after their families: of sered, the
family of the sardites: of elon, the family of the elonites: of
jahleel, the family of the jahleelites.

26:27 these are the families of the zebulunites according to those
that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.

26:28 the sons of joseph after their families were manasseh and
ephraim.

26:29 of the sons of manasseh: of machir, the family of the
machirites: and machir begat gilead: of gilead come the family of the
gileadites.

26:30 these are the sons of gilead: of jeezer, the family of the
jeezerites: of helek, the family of the helekites: 26:31 and of
asriel, the family of the asrielites: and of shechem, the family of
the shechemites: 26:32 and of shemida, the family of the shemidaites:
and of hepher, the family of the hepherites.

26:33 and zelophehad the son of hepher had no sons, but daughters: and
the names of the daughters of zelophehad were mahlah, and noah,
hoglah, milcah, and tirzah.

26:34 these are the families of manasseh, and those that were numbered
of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.

26:35 these are the sons of ephraim after their families: of
shuthelah, the family of the shuthalhites: of becher, the family of
the bachrites: of tahan, the family of the tahanites.

26:36 and these are the sons of shuthelah: of eran, the family of the
eranites.

26:37 these are the families of the sons of ephraim according to those
that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred.
these are the sons of joseph after their families.

26:38 the sons of benjamin after their families: of bela, the family
of the belaites: of ashbel, the family of the ashbelites: of ahiram,
the family of the ahiramites: 26:39 of shupham, the family of the
shuphamites: of hupham, the family of the huphamites.

26:40 and the sons of bela were ard and naaman: of ard, the family of
the ardites: and of naaman, the family of the naamites.

26:41 these are the sons of benjamin after their families: and they
that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six
hundred.

26:42 these are the sons of dan after their families: of shuham, the
family of the shuhamites. these are the families of dan after their
families.

26:43 all the families of the shuhamites, according to those that were
numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.

26:44 of the children of asher after their families: of jimna, the
family of the jimnites: of jesui, the family of the jesuites: of
beriah, the family of the beriites.

26:45 of the sons of beriah: of heber, the family of the heberites: of
malchiel, the family of the malchielites.

26:46 and the name of the daughter of asher was sarah.

26:47 these are the families of the sons of asher according to those
that were numbered of them; who were fifty and three thousand and four
hundred.

26:48 of the sons of naphtali after their families: of jahzeel, the
family of the jahzeelites: of guni, the family of the gunites: 26:49
of jezer, the family of the jezerites: of shillem, the family of the
shillemites.

26:50 these are the families of naphtali according to their families:
and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and
four hundred.

26:51 these were the numbered of the children of israel, six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.

26:52 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 26:53 unto these the land
shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.

26:54 to many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou
shalt give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be
given according to those that were numbered of him.

26:55 notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to
the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.

26:56 according to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided
between many and few.

26:57 and these are they that were numbered of the levites after their
families: of gershon, the family of the gershonites: of kohath, the
family of the kohathites: of merari, the family of the merarites.

26:58 these are the families of the levites: the family of the
libnites, the family of the hebronites, the family of the mahlites,
the family of the mushites, the family of the korathites. and kohath
begat amram.

26:59 and the name of amram's wife was jochebed, the daughter of levi,
whom her mother bare to levi in egypt: and she bare unto amram aaron
and moses, and miriam their sister.

26:60 and unto aaron was born nadab, and abihu, eleazar, and ithamar.

26:61 and nadab and abihu died, when they offered strange fire before
the lord.

26:62 and those that were numbered of them were twenty and three
thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not
numbered among the children of israel, because there was no
inheritance given them among the children of israel.

26:63 these are they that were numbered by moses and eleazar the
priest, who numbered the children of israel in the plains of moab by
jordan near jericho.

26:64 but among these there was not a man of them whom moses and aaron
the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of israel in the
wilderness of sinai.

26:65 for the lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness. and there was not left a man of them, save caleb the son
of jephunneh, and joshua the son of nun.

27:1 then came the daughters of zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son
of gilead, the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of
manasseh the son of joseph: and these are the names of his daughters;
mahlah, noah, and hoglah, and milcah, and tirzah.

27:2 and they stood before moses, and before eleazar the priest, and
before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 27:3 our father died in the
wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered
themselves together against the lord in the company of korah; but died
in his own sin, and had no sons.

27:4 why should the name of our father be done away from among his
family, because he hath no son? give unto us therefore a possession
among the brethren of our father.

27:5 and moses brought their cause before the lord.

27:6 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 27:7 the daughters of
zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an
inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the
inheritance of their father to pass unto them.

27:8 and thou shalt speak unto the children of israel, saying, if a
man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass
unto his daughter.

27:9 and if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his brethren.

27:10 and if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance
unto his father's brethren.

27:11 and if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of israel a
statute of judgment, as the lord commanded moses.

27:12 and the lord said unto moses, get thee up into this mount
abarim, and see the land which i have given unto the children of
israel.

27:13 and when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy
people, as aaron thy brother was gathered.

27:14 for ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of zin, in
the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before
their eyes: that is the water of meribah in kadesh in the wilderness
of zin.

27:15 and moses spake unto the lord, saying, 27:16 let the lord, the
god of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
27:17 which may go out before them, and which may go in before them,
and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the
congregation of the lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.

27:18 and the lord said unto moses, take thee joshua the son of nun, a
man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 27:19 and set
him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and
give him a charge in their sight.

27:20 and thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the
congregation of the children of israel may be obedient.

27:21 and he shall stand before eleazar the priest, who shall ask
counsel for him after the judgment of urim before the lord: at his
word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he,
and all the children of israel with him, even all the congregation.

27:22 and moses did as the lord commanded him: and he took joshua, and
set him before eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
27:23 and he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the
lord commanded by the hand of moses.

28:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 28:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, my offering, and my bread for my
sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe
to offer unto me in their due season.

28:3 and thou shalt say unto them, this is the offering made by fire
which ye shall offer unto the lord; two lambs of the first year
without spot day by day, for a continual burnt offering.

28:4 the one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb
shalt thou offer at even; 28:5 and a tenth part of an ephah of flour
for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten
oil.

28:6 it is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount
sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the lord.

28:7 and the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin
for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine
to be poured unto the lord for a drink offering.

28:8 and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering
of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer
it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord.

28:9 and on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot,
and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil,
and the drink offering thereof: 28:10 this is the burnt offering of
every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

28:11 and in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt
offering unto the lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs
of the first year without spot; 28:12 and three tenth deals of flour
for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth
deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;
28:13 and a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering unto one lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a
sacrifice made by fire unto the lord.

28:14 and their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a
bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of
an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month
throughout the months of the year.

28:15 and one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the lord shall
be offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

28:16 and in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover of
the lord.

28:17 and in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days
shall unleavened bread be eaten.

28:18 in the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no
manner of servile work therein: 28:19 but ye shall offer a sacrifice
made by fire for a burnt offering unto the lord; two young bullocks,
and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you
without blemish: 28:20 and their meat offering shall be of flour
mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and
two tenth deals for a ram; 28:21 a several tenth deal shalt thou offer
for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 28:22 and one goat for a
sin offering, to make an atonement for you.

28:23 ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning,
which is for a continual burnt offering.

28:24 after this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven
days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto
the lord: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and
his drink offering.

28:25 and on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye
shall do no servile work.

28:26 also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat
offering unto the lord, after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy
convocation; ye shall do no servile work: 28:27 but ye shall offer the
burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the lord; two young bullocks,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year; 28:28 and their meat offering
of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two
tenth deals unto one ram, 28:29 a several tenth deal unto one lamb,
throughout the seven lambs; 28:30 and one kid of the goats, to make an
atonement for you.

28:31 ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his
meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their
drink offerings.

29:1 and in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall
have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of
blowing the trumpets unto you.

29:2 and ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the
lord; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year
without blemish: 29:3 and their meat offering shall be of flour
mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, and two tenth deals
for a ram, 29:4 and one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven
lambs: 29:5 and one kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make an
atonement for you: 29:6 beside the burnt offering of the month, and
his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat
offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for
a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the lord.

29:7 and ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy
convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work
therein: 29:8 but ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the lord for a
sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first
year; they shall be unto you without blemish: 29:9 and their meat
offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a
bullock, and two tenth deals to one ram, 29:10 a several tenth deal
for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 29:11 one kid of the goats
for a sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the
continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink
offerings.

29:12 and on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an
holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a
feast unto the lord seven days: 29:13 and ye shall offer a burnt
offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord;
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first
year; they shall be without blemish: 29:14 and their meat offering
shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every
bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the
two rams, 29:15 and a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen
lambs: 29:16 and one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the
continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:17 and on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two
rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot: 29:18 and their
meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the
rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:19 and one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the
continual burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their
drink offerings.

29:20 and on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish; 29:21 and their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:22 and
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and
his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:23 and on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without blemish: 29:24 their meat offering and their
drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:25 and one
kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt
offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:26 and on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs
of the first year without spot: 29:27 and their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:28 and
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and
his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:29 and on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:30 and their meat offering
and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:31 and
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his
meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:32 and on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:33 and their meat offering
and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the
lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner: 29:34 and
one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his
meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:35 on the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do
no servile work therein: 29:36 but ye shall offer a burnt offering, a
sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the lord: one bullock,
one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish: 29:37 their
meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram,
and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the
manner: 29:38 and one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual
burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.

29:39 these things ye shall do unto the lord in your set feasts,
beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt
offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings,
and for your peace offerings.

29:40 and moses told the children of israel according to all that the
lord commanded moses.

30:1 and moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the
children of israel, saying, this is the thing which the lord hath
commanded.

30:2 if a man vow a vow unto the lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according
to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.

30:3 if a woman also vow a vow unto the lord, and bind herself by a
bond, being in her father's house in her youth; 30:4 and her father
hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her
father shall hold his peace at her; then all her vows shall stand, and
every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.

30:5 but if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not
any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul,
shall stand: and the lord shall forgive her, because her father
disallowed her.

30:6 and if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered
ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; 30:7 and her
husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard
it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her
soul shall stand.

30:8 but if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it;
then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered
with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the
lord shall forgive her.

30:9 but every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith
they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.

30:10 and if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a
bond with an oath; 30:11 and her husband heard it, and held his peace
at her, and disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and
every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

30:12 but if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he
heard them; then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her
vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband
hath made them void; and the lord shall forgive her.

30:13 every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her
husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.

30:14 but if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to
day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are
upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the
day that he heard them.

30:15 but if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard
them; then he shall bear her iniquity.

30:16 these are the statutes, which the lord commanded moses, between
a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in
her youth in her father's house.

31:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:2 avenge the children
of israel of the midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy
people.

31:3 and moses spake unto the people, saying, arm some of yourselves
unto the war, and let them go against the midianites, and avenge the
lord of midian.

31:4 of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of israel,
shall ye send to the war.

31:5 so there were delivered out of the thousands of israel, a
thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

31:6 and moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them
and phinehas the son of eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy
instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.

31:7 and they warred against the midianites, as the lord commanded
moses; and they slew all the males.

31:8 and they slew the kings of midian, beside the rest of them that
were slain; namely, evi, and rekem, and zur, and hur, and reba, five
kings of midian: balaam also the son of beor they slew with the sword.

31:9 and the children of israel took all the women of midian captives,
and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all
their flocks, and all their goods.

31:10 and they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all
their goodly castles, with fire.

31:11 and they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and
of beasts.

31:12 and they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto
moses, and eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the
children of israel, unto the camp at the plains of moab, which are by
jordan near jericho.

31:13 and moses, and eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.

31:14 and moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the
captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from
the battle.

31:15 and moses said unto them, have ye saved all the women alive?
31:16 behold, these caused the children of israel, through the counsel
of balaam, to commit trespass against the lord in the matter of peor,
and there was a plague among the congregation of the lord.

31:17 now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill
every woman that hath known man by lying with him.

31:18 but all the women children, that have not known a man by lying
with him, keep alive for yourselves.

31:19 and do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath
killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both
yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.

31:20 and purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and
all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood.

31:21 and eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to
the battle, this is the ordinance of the law which the lord commanded
moses; 31:22 only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the
tin, and the lead, 31:23 every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall
make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it
shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth
not the fire ye shall make go through the water.

31:24 and ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall
be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.

31:25 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 31:26 take the sum of the
prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and eleazar the
priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation: 31:27 and divide
the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who
went out to battle, and between all the congregation: 31:28 and levy a
tribute unto the lord of the men of war which went out to battle: one
soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of
the asses, and of the sheep: 31:29 take it of their half, and give it
unto eleazar the priest, for an heave offering of the lord.

31:30 and of the children of israel's half, thou shalt take one
portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of
the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the levites,
which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the lord.

31:31 and moses and eleazar the priest did as the lord commanded
moses.

31:32 and the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war
had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five
thousand sheep, 31:33 and threescore and twelve thousand beeves, 31:34
and threescore and one thousand asses, 31:35 and thirty and two
thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with
him.

31:36 and the half, which was the portion of them that went out to
war, was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty
thousand and five hundred sheep: 31:37 and the lord's tribute of the
sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.

31:38 and the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the lord's
tribute was threescore and twelve.

31:39 and the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which
the lord's tribute was threescore and one.

31:40 and the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the lord's
tribute was thirty and two persons.

31:41 and moses gave the tribute, which was the lord's heave offering,
unto eleazar the priest, as the lord commanded moses.

31:42 and of the children of israel's half, which moses divided from
the men that warred, 31:43 (now the half that pertained unto the
congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven
thousand and five hundred sheep, 31:44 and thirty and six thousand
beeves, 31:45 and thirty thousand asses and five hundred, 31:46 and
sixteen thousand persons;) 31:47 even of the children of israel's
half, moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and
gave them unto the levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of
the lord; as the lord commanded moses.

31:48 and the officers which were over thousands of the host, the
captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto moses:
31:49 and they said unto moses, thy servants have taken the sum of the
men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man
of us.

31:50 we have therefore brought an oblation for the lord, what every
man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings,
earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the
lord.

31:51 and moses and eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
wrought jewels.

31:52 and all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the
lord, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds,
was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.

31:53 (for the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
31:54 and moses and eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of
the congregation, for a memorial for the children of israel before the
lord.

32:1 now the children of reuben and the children of gad had a very
great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of jazer, and
the land of gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;
32:2 the children of gad and the children of reuben came and spake
unto moses, and to eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the
congregation, saying, 32:3 ataroth, and dibon, and jazer, and nimrah,
and heshbon, and elealeh, and shebam, and nebo, and beon, 32:4 even
the country which the lord smote before the congregation of israel, is
a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle: 32:5 wherefore, said
they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto
thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over jordan.

32:6 and moses said unto the children of gad and to the children of
reuben, shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?  32:7
and wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of israel from
going over into the land which the lord hath given them?  32:8 thus
did your fathers, when i sent them from kadeshbarnea to see the land.

32:9 for when they went up unto the valley of eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of israel, that they
should not go into the land which the lord had given them.

32:10 and the lord's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 surely none of the men that came up out of egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 save caleb the son of jephunneh the kenezite, and
joshua the son of nun: for they have wholly followed the lord.

32:13 and the lord's anger was kindled against israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the lord, was consumed.

32:14 and, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the lord toward
israel.

32:15 for if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them
in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people.

32:16 and they came near unto him, and said, we will build sheepfolds
here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones: 32:17 but we
ourselves will go ready armed before the children of israel, until we
have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in
the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.

32:18 we will not return unto our houses, until the children of israel
have inherited every man his inheritance.

32:19 for we will not inherit with them on yonder side jordan, or
forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side jordan
eastward.

32:20 and moses said unto them, if ye will do this thing, if ye will
go armed before the lord to war, 32:21 and will go all of you armed
over jordan before the lord, until he hath driven out his enemies from
before him, 32:22 and the land be subdued before the lord: then
afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the lord, and
before israel; and this land shall be your possession before the lord.

32:23 but if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the
lord: and be sure your sin will find you out.

32:24 build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.

32:25 and the children of gad and the children of reuben spake unto
moses, saying, thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.

32:26 our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shall be there in the cities of gilead: 32:27 but thy servants will
pass over, every man armed for war, before the lord to battle, as my
lord saith.

32:28 so concerning them moses commanded eleazar the priest, and
joshua the son of nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel: 32:29 and moses said unto them, if the children of
gad and the children of reuben will pass with you over jordan, every
man armed to battle, before the lord, and the land shall be subdued
before you; then ye shall give them the land of gilead for a
possession: 32:30 but if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of canaan.

32:31 and the children of gad and the children of reuben answered,
saying, as the lord hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.

32:32 we will pass over armed before the lord into the land of canaan,
that the possession of our inheritance on this side jordan may be
ours.

32:33 and moses gave unto them, even to the children of gad, and to
the children of reuben, and unto half the tribe of manasseh the son of
joseph, the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, and the kingdom of
og king of bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
even the cities of the country round about.

32:34 and the children of gad built dibon, and ataroth, and aroer,
32:35 and atroth, shophan, and jaazer, and jogbehah, 32:36 and
bethnimrah, and bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.

32:37 and the children of reuben built heshbon, and elealeh, and
kirjathaim, 32:38 and nebo, and baalmeon, (their names being changed,)
and shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.

32:39 and the children of machir the son of manasseh went to gilead,
and took it, and dispossessed the amorite which was in it.

32:40 and moses gave gilead unto machir the son of manasseh; and he
dwelt therein.

32:41 and jair the son of manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them havothjair.

32:42 and nobah went and took kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it nobah, after his own name.

33:1 these are the journeys of the children of israel, which went
forth out of the land of egypt with their armies under the hand of
moses and aaron.

33:2 and moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by
the commandment of the lord: and these are their journeys according to
their goings out.

33:3 and they departed from rameses in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the
children of israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
egyptians.

33:4 for the egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the lord had
smitten among them: upon their gods also the lord executed judgments.

33:5 and the children of israel removed from rameses, and pitched in
succoth.

33:6 and they departed from succoth, and pitched in etham, which is in
the edge of the wilderness.

33:7 and they removed from etham, and turned again unto pihahiroth,
which is before baalzephon: and they pitched before migdol.

33:8 and they departed from before pihahiroth, and passed through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
the wilderness of etham, and pitched in marah.

33:9 and they removed from marah, and came unto elim: and in elim were
twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they
pitched there.

33:10 and they removed from elim, and encamped by the red sea.

33:11 and they removed from the red sea, and encamped in the
wilderness of sin.

33:12 and they took their journey out of the wilderness of sin, and
encamped in dophkah.

33:13 and they departed from dophkah, and encamped in alush.

33:14 and they removed from alush, and encamped at rephidim, where was
no water for the people to drink.

33:15 and they departed from rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness
of sinai.

33:16 and they removed from the desert of sinai, and pitched at
kibrothhattaavah.

33:17 and they departed from kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at
hazeroth.

33:18 and they departed from hazeroth, and pitched in rithmah.

33:19 and they departed from rithmah, and pitched at rimmonparez.

33:20 and they departed from rimmonparez, and pitched in libnah.

33:21 and they removed from libnah, and pitched at rissah.

33:22 and they journeyed from rissah, and pitched in kehelathah.

33:23 and they went from kehelathah, and pitched in mount shapher.

33:24 and they removed from mount shapher, and encamped in haradah.

33:25 and they removed from haradah, and pitched in makheloth.

33:26 and they removed from makheloth, and encamped at tahath.

33:27 and they departed from tahath, and pitched at tarah.

33:28 and they removed from tarah, and pitched in mithcah.

33:29 and they went from mithcah, and pitched in hashmonah.

33:30 and they departed from hashmonah, and encamped at moseroth.

33:31 and they departed from moseroth, and pitched in benejaakan.

33:32 and they removed from benejaakan, and encamped at horhagidgad.

33:33 and they went from horhagidgad, and pitched in jotbathah.

33:34 and they removed from jotbathah, and encamped at ebronah.

33:35 and they departed from ebronah, and encamped at eziongaber.

33:36 and they removed from eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness
of zin, which is kadesh.

33:37 and they removed from kadesh, and pitched in mount hor, in the
edge of the land of edom.

33:38 and aaron the priest went up into mount hor at the commandment
of the lord, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children
of israel were come out of the land of egypt, in the first day of the
fifth month.

33:39 and aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he
died in mount hor.

33:40 and king arad the canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the
land of canaan, heard of the coming of the children of israel.

33:41 and they departed from mount hor, and pitched in zalmonah.

33:42 and they departed from zalmonah, and pitched in punon.

33:43 and they departed from punon, and pitched in oboth.

33:44 and they departed from oboth, and pitched in ijeabarim, in the
border of moab.

33:45 and they departed from iim, and pitched in dibongad.

33:46 and they removed from dibongad, and encamped in almondiblathaim.

33:47 and they removed from almondiblathaim, and pitched in the
mountains of abarim, before nebo.

33:48 and they departed from the mountains of abarim, and pitched in
the plains of moab by jordan near jericho.

33:49 and they pitched by jordan, from bethjesimoth even unto
abelshittim in the plains of moab.

33:50 and the lord spake unto moses in the plains of moab by jordan
near jericho, saying, 33:51 speak unto the children of israel, and say
unto them, when ye are passed over jordan into the land of canaan;
33:52 then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from
before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their
molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places: 33:53 and
ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein:
for i have given you the land to possess it.

33:54 and ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among
your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and
to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's
inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to
the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.

33:55 but if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain
of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and
shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.

33:56 moreover it shall come to pass, that i shall do unto you, as i
thought to do unto them.

34:1 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:2 command the children
of israel, and say unto them, when ye come into the land of canaan;
(this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even
the land of canaan with the coasts thereof:) 34:3 then your south
quarter shall be from the wilderness of zin along by the coast of
edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea
eastward: 34:4 and your border shall turn from the south to the ascent
of akrabbim, and pass on to zin: and the going forth thereof shall be
from the south to kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to hazaraddar, and
pass on to azmon: 34:5 and the border shall fetch a compass from azmon
unto the river of egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.

34:6 and as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea
for a border: this shall be your west border.

34:7 and this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall
point out for you mount hor: 34:8 from mount hor ye shall point out
your border unto the entrance of hamath; and the goings forth of the
border shall be to zedad: 34:9 and the border shall go on to ziphron,
and the goings out of it shall be at hazarenan: this shall be your
north border.

34:10 and ye shall point out your east border from hazarenan to
shepham: 34:11 and the coast shall go down from shepham to riblah, on
the east side of ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach
unto the side of the sea of chinnereth eastward: 34:12 and the border
shall go down to jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt
sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.

34:13 and moses commanded the children of israel, saying, this is the
land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the lord commanded to give
unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 34:14 for the tribe of
the children of reuben according to the house of their fathers, and
the tribe of the children of gad according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of
manasseh have received their inheritance: 34:15 the two tribes and the
half tribe have received their inheritance on this side jordan near
jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.

34:16 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 34:17 these are the names
of the men which shall divide the land unto you: eleazar the priest,
and joshua the son of nun.

34:18 and ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance.

34:19 and the names of the men are these: of the tribe of judah, caleb
the son of jephunneh.

34:20 and of the tribe of the children of simeon, shemuel the son of
ammihud.

34:21 of the tribe of benjamin, elidad the son of chislon.

34:22 and the prince of the tribe of the children of dan, bukki the
son of jogli.

34:23 the prince of the children of joseph, for the tribe of the
children of manasseh, hanniel the son of ephod.

34:24 and the prince of the tribe of the children of ephraim, kemuel
the son of shiphtan.

34:25 and the prince of the tribe of the children of zebulun,
elizaphan the son of parnach.

34:26 and the prince of the tribe of the children of issachar, paltiel
the son of azzan.

34:27 and the prince of the tribe of the children of asher, ahihud the
son of shelomi.

34:28 and the prince of the tribe of the children of naphtali, pedahel
the son of ammihud.

34:29 these are they whom the lord commanded to divide the inheritance
unto the children of israel in the land of canaan.

35:1 and the lord spake unto moses in the plains of moab by jordan
near jericho, saying, 35:2 command the children of israel, that they
give unto the levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to
dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the levites suburbs for the
cities round about them.

35:3 and the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of
them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their
beasts.

35:4 and the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the
levites, shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand
cubits round about.

35:5 and ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two
thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the
west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand
cubits; and the city shall be in the midst: this shall be to them the
suburbs of the cities.

35:6 and among the cities which ye shall give unto the levites there
shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the
manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty
and two cities.

35:7 so all the cities which ye shall give to the levites shall be
forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.

35:8 and the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of
the children of israel: from them that have many ye shall give many;
but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of
his cities unto the levites according to his inheritance which he
inheriteth.

35:9 and the lord spake unto moses, saying, 35:10 speak unto the
children of israel, and say unto them, when ye be come over jordan
into the land of canaan; 35:11 then ye shall appoint you cities to be
cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which
killeth any person at unawares.

35:12 and they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger;
that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in
judgment.

35:13 and of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have
for refuge.

35:14 ye shall give three cities on this side jordan, and three cities
shall ye give in the land of canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.

35:15 these six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of
israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that
every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.

35:16 and if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die,
he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.

35:17 and if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die,
and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
death.

35:18 or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may
die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to
death.

35:19 the revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he
meeteth him, he shall slay him.

35:20 but if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of
wait, that he die; 35:21 or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he
die: he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a
murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he
meeteth him.

35:22 but if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon
him any thing without laying of wait, 35:23 or with any stone,
wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon him, that he
die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm: 35:24 then the
congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood
according to these judgments: 35:25 and the congregation shall deliver
the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood, and the
congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he
was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest,
which was anointed with the holy oil.

35:26 but if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of
the city of his refuge, whither he was fled; 35:27 and the revenger of
blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the
revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood:
35:28 because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until
the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest
the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.

35:29 so these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

35:30 whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by
the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any
person to cause him to die.

35:31 moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to
death.

35:32 and ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the
city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land,
until the death of the priest.

35:33 so ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it
defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that
is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

35:34 defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein i
dwell: for i the lord dwell among the children of israel.

36:1 and the chief fathers of the families of the children of gilead,
the son of machir, the son of manasseh, of the families of the sons of
joseph, came near, and spake before moses, and before the princes, the
chief fathers of the children of israel: 36:2 and they said, the lord
commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the
children of israel: and my lord was commanded by the lord to give the
inheritance of zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.

36:3 and if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of
the children of israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the
inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the
tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot
of our inheritance.

36:4 and when the jubile of the children of israel shall be, then
shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe
whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away
from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.

36:5 and moses commanded the children of israel according to the word
of the lord, saying, the tribe of the sons of joseph hath said well.

36:6 this is the thing which the lord doth command concerning the
daughters of zelophehad, saying, let them marry to whom they think
best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.

36:7 so shall not the inheritance of the children of israel remove
from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of israel shall
keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

36:8 and every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe
of the children of israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the
tribe of her father, that the children of israel may enjoy every man
the inheritance of his fathers.

36:9 neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another
tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of israel shall
keep himself to his own inheritance.

36:10 even as the lord commanded moses, so did the daughters of
zelophehad: 36:11 for mahlah, tirzah, and hoglah, and milcah, and
noah, the daughters of zelophehad, were married unto their father's
brothers' sons: 36:12 and they were married into the families of the
sons of manasseh the son of joseph, and their inheritance remained in
the tribe of the family of their father.

36:13 these are the commandments and the judgments, which the lord
commanded by the hand of moses unto the children of israel in the
plains of moab by jordan near jericho.




the fifth book of moses:  called deuteronomy


1:1 these be the words which moses spake unto all israel on this side
jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the red sea,
between paran, and tophel, and laban, and hazeroth, and dizahab.

1:2 (there are eleven days' journey from horeb by the way of mount
seir unto kadeshbarnea.)  1:3 and it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that moses
spake unto the children of israel, according unto all that the lord
had given him in commandment unto them; 1:4 after he had slain sihon
the king of the amorites, which dwelt in heshbon, and og the king of
bashan, which dwelt at astaroth in edrei: 1:5 on this side jordan, in
the land of moab, began moses to declare this law, saying, 1:6 the
lord our god spake unto us in horeb, saying, ye have dwelt long enough
in this mount: 1:7 turn you, and take your journey, and go to the
mount of the amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the
plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea
side, to the land of the canaanites, and unto lebanon, unto the great
river, the river euphrates.

1:8 behold, i have set the land before you: go in and possess the land
which the lord sware unto your fathers, abraham, isaac, and jacob, to
give unto them and to their seed after them.

1:9 and i spake unto you at that time, saying, i am not able to bear
you myself alone: 1:10 the lord your god hath multiplied you, and,
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

1:11 (the lord god of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)  1:12 how can
i myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
1:13 take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your
tribes, and i will make them rulers over you.

1:14 and ye answered me, and said, the thing which thou hast spoken is
good for us to do.

1:15 so i took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made
them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over
hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and
officers among your tribes.

1:16 and i charged your judges at that time, saying, hear the causes
between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with him.

1:17 ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the
small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man;
for the judgment is god's: and the cause that is too hard for you,
bring it unto me, and i will hear it.

1:18 and i commanded you at that time all the things which ye should
do.

1:19 and when we departed from horeb, we went through all that great
and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of
the amorites, as the lord our god commanded us; and we came to
kadeshbarnea.

1:20 and i said unto you, ye are come unto the mountain of the
amorites, which the lord our god doth give unto us.

1:21 behold, the lord thy god hath set the land before thee: go up and
possess it, as the lord god of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear
not, neither be discouraged.

1:22 and ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, we will send
men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us
word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall
come.

1:23 and the saying pleased me well: and i took twelve men of you, one
of a tribe: 1:24 and they turned and went up into the mountain, and
came unto the valley of eshcol, and searched it out.

1:25 and they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and
brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, it is a
good land which the lord our god doth give us.

1:26 notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the
commandment of the lord your god: 1:27 and ye murmured in your tents,
and said, because the lord hated us, he hath brought us forth out of
the land of egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the amorites, to
destroy us.

1:28 whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart,
saying, the people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great
and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the
anakims there.

1:29 then i said unto you, dread not, neither be afraid of them.

1:30 the lord your god which goeth before you, he shall fight for you,
according to all that he did for you in egypt before your eyes; 1:31
and in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the lord thy god
bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went,
until ye came into this place.

1:32 yet in this thing ye did not believe the lord your god, 1:33 who
went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your
tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and
in a cloud by day.

1:34 and the lord heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and
sware, saying, 1:35 surely there shall not one of these men of this
evil generation see that good land, which i sware to give unto your
fathers.

1:36 save caleb the son of jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will
i give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children,
because he hath wholly followed the lord.

1:37 also the lord was angry with me for your sakes, saying, thou also
shalt not go in thither.

1:38 but joshua the son of nun, which standeth before thee, he shall
go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause israel to inherit it.

1:39 moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and
your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and
evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will i give it, and they
shall possess it.

1:40 but as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the
wilderness by the way of the red sea.

1:41 then ye answered and said unto me, we have sinned against the
lord, we will go up and fight, according to all that the lord our god
commanded us.

and when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready
to go up into the hill.

1:42 and the lord said unto me, say unto them. go not up, neither
fight; for i am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.

1:43 so i spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against
the commandment of the lord, and went presumptuously up into the hill.

1:44 and the amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against
you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in seir, even unto
hormah.

1:45 and ye returned and wept before the lord; but the lord would not
hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.

1:46 so ye abode in kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye
abode there.

2:1 then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the
way of the red sea, as the lord spake unto me: and we compassed mount
seir many days.

2:2 and the lord spake unto me, saying, 2:3 ye have compassed this
mountain long enough: turn you northward.

2:4 and command thou the people, saying, ye are to pass through the
coast of your brethren the children of esau, which dwell in seir; and
they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves
therefore: 2:5 meddle not with them; for i will not give you of their
land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; because i have given mount
seir unto esau for a possession.

2:6 ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall
also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.

2:7 for the lord thy god hath blessed thee in all the works of thy
hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these
forty years the lord thy god hath been with thee; thou hast lacked
nothing.

2:8 and when we passed by from our brethren the children of esau,
which dwelt in seir, through the way of the plain from elath, and from
eziongaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of moab.

2:9 and the lord said unto me, distress not the moabites, neither
contend with them in battle: for i will not give thee of their land
for a possession; because i have given ar unto the children of lot for
a possession.

2:10 the emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many,
and tall, as the anakims; 2:11 which also were accounted giants, as
the anakims; but the moabites called them emims.

2:12 the horims also dwelt in seir beforetime; but the children of
esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them,
and dwelt in their stead; as israel did unto the land of his
possession, which the lord gave unto them.

2:13 now rise up, said i, and get you over the brook zered. and we
went over the brook zered.

2:14 and the space in which we came from kadeshbarnea, until we were
come over the brook zered, was thirty and eight years; until all the
generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as
the lord sware unto them.

2:15 for indeed the hand of the lord was against them, to destroy them
from among the host, until they were consumed.

2:16 so it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and
dead from among the people, 2:17 that the lord spake unto me, saying,
2:18 thou art to pass over through ar, the coast of moab, this day:
2:19 and when thou comest nigh over against the children of ammon,
distress them not, nor meddle with them: for i will not give thee of
the land of the children of ammon any possession; because i have given
it unto the children of lot for a possession.

2:20 (that also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein
in old time; and the ammonites call them zamzummims; 2:21 a people
great, and many, and tall, as the anakims; but the lord destroyed them
before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead: 2:22
as he did to the children of esau, which dwelt in seir, when he
destroyed the horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and
dwelt in their stead even unto this day: 2:23 and the avims which
dwelt in hazerim, even unto azzah, the caphtorims, which came forth
out of caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)  2:24 rise
ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river arnon: behold, i
have given into thine hand sihon the amorite, king of heshbon, and his
land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.

2:25 this day will i begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of
thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear
report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.

2:26 and i sent messengers out of the wilderness of kedemoth unto
sihon king of heshbon with words of peace, saying, 2:27 let me pass
through thy land: i will go along by the high way, i will neither turn
unto the right hand nor to the left.

2:28 thou shalt sell me meat for money, that i may eat; and give me
water for money, that i may drink: only i will pass through on my
feet; 2:29 (as the children of esau which dwell in seir, and the
moabites which dwell in ar, did unto me;) until i shall pass over
jordan into the land which the lord our god giveth us.

2:30 but sihon king of heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the
lord thy god hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that
he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.

2:31 and the lord said unto me, behold, i have begun to give sihon and
his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his
land.

2:32 then sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight
at jahaz.

2:33 and the lord our god delivered him before us; and we smote him,
and his sons, and all his people.

2:34 and we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed
the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left
none to remain: 2:35 only the cattle we took for a prey unto
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

2:36 from aroer, which is by the brink of the river of arnon, and from
the city that is by the river, even unto gilead, there was not one
city too strong for us: the lord our god delivered all unto us: 2:37
only unto the land of the children of ammon thou camest not, nor unto
any place of the river jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains,
nor unto whatsoever the lord our god forbad us.

3:1 then we turned, and went up the way to bashan: and og the king of
bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at edrei.

3:2 and the lord said unto me, fear him not: for i will deliver him,
and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do
unto him as thou didst unto sihon king of the amorites, which dwelt at
heshbon.

3:3 so the lord our god delivered into our hands og also, the king of
bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to
him remaining.

3:4 and we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city
which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of
argob, the kingdom of og in bashan.

3:5 all these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars;
beside unwalled towns a great many.

3:6 and we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto sihon king of
heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every
city.

3:7 but all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a
prey to ourselves.

3:8 and we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the
amorites the land that was on this side jordan, from the river of
arnon unto mount hermon; 3:9 (which hermon the sidonians call sirion;
and the amorites call it shenir;) 3:10 all the cities of the plain,
and all gilead, and all bashan, unto salchah and edrei, cities of the
kingdom of og in bashan.

3:11 for only og king of bashan remained of the remnant of giants;
behold his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in rabbath of
the children of ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four
cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.

3:12 and this land, which we possessed at that time, from aroer, which
is by the river arnon, and half mount gilead, and the cities thereof,
gave i unto the reubenites and to the gadites.

3:13 and the rest of gilead, and all bashan, being the kingdom of og,
gave i unto the half tribe of manasseh; all the region of argob, with
all bashan, which was called the land of giants.

3:14 jair the son of manasseh took all the country of argob unto the
coasts of geshuri and maachathi; and called them after his own name,
bashanhavothjair, unto this day.

3:15 and i gave gilead unto machir.

3:16 and unto the reubenites and unto the gadites i gave from gilead
even unto the river arnon half the valley, and the border even unto
the river jabbok, which is the border of the children of ammon; 3:17
the plain also, and jordan, and the coast thereof, from chinnereth
even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under ashdothpisgah
eastward.

3:18 and i commanded you at that time, saying, the lord your god hath
given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before
your brethren the children of israel, all that are meet for the war.

3:19 but your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for i
know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which i
have given you; 3:20 until the lord have given rest unto your
brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land
which the lord your god hath given them beyond jordan: and then shall
ye return every man unto his possession, which i have given you.

3:21 and i commanded joshua at that time, saying, thine eyes have seen
all that the lord your god hath done unto these two kings: so shall
the lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.

3:22 ye shall not fear them: for the lord your god he shall fight for
you.

3:23 and i besought the lord at that time, saying, 3:24 o lord god,
thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty
hand: for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do
according to thy works, and according to thy might?  3:25 i pray thee,
let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond jordan, that
goodly mountain, and lebanon.

3:26 but the lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear
me: and the lord said unto me, let it suffice thee; speak no more unto
me of this matter.

3:27 get thee up into the top of pisgah, and lift up thine eyes
westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it
with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this jordan.

3:28 but charge joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he
shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit
the land which thou shalt see.

3:29 so we abode in the valley over against bethpeor.

4:1 now therefore hearken, o israel, unto the statutes and unto the
judgments, which i teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go
in and possess the land which the lord god of your fathers giveth you.

4:2 ye shall not add unto the word which i command you, neither shall
ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the
lord your god which i command you.

4:3 your eyes have seen what the lord did because of baalpeor: for all
the men that followed baalpeor, the lord thy god hath destroyed them
from among you.

4:4 but ye that did cleave unto the lord your god are alive every one
of you this day.

4:5 behold, i have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the lord
my god commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
possess it.

4:6 keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.

4:7 for what nation is there so great, who hath god so nigh unto them,
as the lord our god is in all things that we call upon him for?  4:8
and what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so
righteous as all this law, which i set before you this day?  4:9 only
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons'
sons; 4:10 specially the day that thou stoodest before the lord thy
god in horeb, when the lord said unto me, gather me the people
together, and i will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that
they may teach their children.

4:11 and ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain
burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and
thick darkness.

4:12 and the lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye
heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a
voice.

4:13 and he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to
perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of
stone.

4:14 and the lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and
judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to
possess it.

4:15 take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner
of similitude on the day that the lord spake unto you in horeb out of
the midst of the fire: 4:16 lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a
graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, 4:17 the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the
likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air, 4:18 the likeness
of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 4:19 and lest thou lift up
thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and
the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship
them, and serve them, which the lord thy god hath divided unto all
nations under the whole heaven.

4:20 but the lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the
iron furnace, even out of egypt, to be unto him a people of
inheritance, as ye are this day.

4:21 furthermore the lord was angry with me for your sakes, and sware
that i should not go over jordan, and that i should not go in unto
that good land, which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance:
4:22 but i must die in this land, i must not go over jordan: but ye
shall go over, and possess that good land.

4:23 take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the
lord your god, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or
the likeness of any thing, which the lord thy god hath forbidden thee.

4:24 for the lord thy god is a consuming fire, even a jealous god.

4:25 when thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye
shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves,
and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do
evil in the sight of the lord thy god, to provoke him to anger: 4:26 i
call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall
soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over jordan to
possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly
be destroyed.

4:27 and the lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be
left few in number among the heathen, whither the lord shall lead you.

4:28 and there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

4:29 but if from thence thou shalt seek the lord thy god, thou shalt
find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

4:30 when thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon
thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the lord thy god, and
shalt be obedient unto his voice; 4:31 (for the lord thy god is a
merciful god;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor
forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.

4:32 for ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee,
since the day that god created man upon the earth, and ask from the
one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such
thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?  4:33 did
ever people hear the voice of god speaking out of the midst of the
fire, as thou hast heard, and live?  4:34 or hath god assayed to go
and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by
temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty
hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to
all that the lord your god did for you in egypt before your eyes?
4:35 unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the lord he
is god; there is none else beside him.

4:36 out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might
instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou
heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.

4:37 and because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power
out of egypt; 4:38 to drive out nations from before thee greater and
mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for
an inheritance, as it is this day.

4:39 know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
lord he is god in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is
none else.

4:40 thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments,
which i command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon
the earth, which the lord thy god giveth thee, for ever.

4:41 then moses severed three cities on this side jordan toward the
sunrising; 4:42 that the slayer might flee thither, which should kill
his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that
fleeing unto one of these cities he might live: 4:43 namely, bezer in
the wilderness, in the plain country, of the reubenites; and ramoth in
gilead, of the gadites; and golan in bashan, of the manassites.

4:44 and this is the law which moses set before the children of
israel: 4:45 these are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which moses spake unto the children of israel, after they
came forth out of egypt.

4:46 on this side jordan, in the valley over against bethpeor, in the
land of sihon king of the amorites, who dwelt at heshbon, whom moses
and the children of israel smote, after they were come forth out of
egypt: 4:47 and they possessed his land, and the land of og king of
bashan, two kings of the amorites, which were on this side jordan
toward the sunrising; 4:48 from aroer, which is by the bank of the
river arnon, even unto mount sion, which is hermon, 4:49 and all the
plain on this side jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain,
under the springs of pisgah.

5:1 and moses called all israel, and said unto them, hear, o israel,
the statutes and judgments which i speak in your ears this day, that
ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.

5:2 the lord our god made a covenant with us in horeb.

5:3 the lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us,
even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

5:4 the lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the
midst of the fire, 5:5 (i stood between the lord and you at that time,
to shew you the word of the lord: for ye were afraid by reason of the
fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, 5:6 i am the lord thy
god, which brought thee out of the land of egypt, from the house of
bondage.

5:7 thou shalt have none other gods before me.

5:8 thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the waters beneath the earth: 5:9 thou shalt not bow down
thyself unto them, nor serve them: for i the lord thy god am a jealous
god, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me, 5:10 and shewing
mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.

5:11 thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vain: for the
lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

5:12 keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the lord thy god hath
commanded thee.

5:13 six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work: 5:14 but the
seventh day is the sabbath of the lord thy god: in it thou shalt not
do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant,
nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy
cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.

5:15 and remember that thou wast a servant in the land of egypt, and
that the lord thy god brought thee out thence through a mighty hand
and by a stretched out arm: therefore the lord thy god commanded thee
to keep the sabbath day.

5:16 honour thy father and thy mother, as the lord thy god hath
commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go
well with thee, in the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

5:17 thou shalt not kill.

5:18 neither shalt thou commit adultery.

5:19 neither shalt thou steal.

5:20 neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.

5:21 neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither shalt
thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, or his manservant, or his
maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbour's.

5:22 these words the lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount
out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness,
with a great voice: and he added no more. and he wrote them in two
tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.

5:23 and it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of
the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near
unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders; 5:24 and
ye said, behold, the lord our god hath shewed us his glory and his
greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire:
we have seen this day that god doth talk with man, and he liveth.

5:25 now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume
us: if we hear the voice of the lord our god any more, then we shall
die.

5:26 for who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the
living god speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
lived?  5:27 go thou near, and hear all that the lord our god shall
say: and speak thou unto us all that the lord our god shall speak unto
thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

5:28 and the lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto
me; and the lord said unto me, i have heard the voice of the words of
this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all
that they have spoken.

5:29 o that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them,
and with their children for ever!  5:30 go say to them, get you into
your tents again.

5:31 but as for thee, stand thou here by me, and i will speak unto
thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which i give
them to possess it.

5:32 ye shall observe to do therefore as the lord your god hath
commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the
left.

5:33 ye shall walk in all the ways which the lord your god hath
commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and
that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

6:1 now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,
which the lord your god commanded to teach you, that ye might do them
in the land whither ye go to possess it: 6:2 that thou mightest fear
the lord thy god, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which
i command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of
thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.

6:3 hear therefore, o israel, and observe to do it; that it may be
well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the lord god of
thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and
honey.

6:4 hear, o israel: the lord our god is one lord: 6:5 and thou shalt
love the lord thy god with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might.

6:6 and these words, which i command thee this day, shall be in thine
heart: 6:7 and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and
shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou
walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

6:8 and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they
shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.

6:9 and thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy
gates.

6:10 and it shall be, when the lord thy god shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac,
and to jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou
buildedst not, 6:11 and houses full of all good things, which thou
filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and
olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and
be full; 6:12 then beware lest thou forget the lord, which brought
thee forth out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondage.

6:13 thou shalt fear the lord thy god, and serve him, and shalt swear
by his name.

6:14 ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which
are round about you; 6:15 (for the lord thy god is a jealous god among
you) lest the anger of the lord thy god be kindled against thee, and
destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

6:16 ye shall not tempt the lord your god, as ye tempted him in
massah.

6:17 ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the lord your god,
and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.

6:18 and thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of
the lord: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in
and possess the good land which the lord sware unto thy fathers.

6:19 to cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the lord hath
spoken.

6:20 and when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, what mean
the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the lord
our god hath commanded you?  6:21 then thou shalt say unto thy son, we
were pharaoh's bondmen in egypt; and the lord brought us out of egypt
with a mighty hand: 6:22 and the lord shewed signs and wonders, great
and sore, upon egypt, upon pharaoh, and upon all his household, before
our eyes: 6:23 and he brought us out from thence, that he might bring
us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.

6:24 and the lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the
lord our god, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as
it is at this day.

6:25 and it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
commandments before the lord our god, as he hath commanded us.

7:1 when the lord thy god shall bring thee into the land whither thou
goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the
hittites, and the girgashites, and the amorites, and the canaanites,
and the perizzites, and the hivites, and the jebusites, seven nations
greater and mightier than thou; 7:2 and when the lord thy god shall
deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy
them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
7:3 neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou
shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy
son.

7:4 for they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other gods: so will the anger of the lord be kindled against
you, and destroy thee suddenly.

7:5 but thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars,
and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven images with fire.

7:6 for thou art an holy people unto the lord thy god: the lord thy
god hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all
people that are upon the face of the earth.

7:7 the lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye
were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all
people: 7:8 but because the lord loved you, and because he would keep
the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the lord brought
you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of
bondmen, from the hand of pharaoh king of egypt.

7:9 know therefore that the lord thy god, he is god, the faithful god,
which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his
commandments to a thousand generations; 7:10 and repayeth them that
hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him
that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.

7:11 thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and
the judgments, which i command thee this day, to do them.

7:12 wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these
judgments, and keep, and do them, that the lord thy god shall keep
unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:
7:13 and he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will
also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn,
and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

7:14 thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male
or female barren among you, or among your cattle.

7:15 and the lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
none of the evil diseases of egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but
will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

7:16 and thou shalt consume all the people which the lord thy god
shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither
shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.

7:17 if thou shalt say in thine heart, these nations are more than i;
how can i dispossess them?  7:18 thou shalt not be afraid of them: but
shalt well remember what the lord thy god did unto pharaoh, and unto
all egypt; 7:19 the great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the
signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out
arm, whereby the lord thy god brought thee out: so shall the lord thy
god do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.

7:20 moreover the lord thy god will send the hornet among them, until
they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.

7:21 thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the lord thy god is
among you, a mighty god and terrible.

7:22 and the lord thy god will put out those nations before thee by
little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the
beasts of the field increase upon thee.

7:23 but the lord thy god shall deliver them unto thee, and shall
destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.

7:24 and he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt
destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to
stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.

7:25 the graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou
shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto
thee, lest thou be snared therin: for it is an abomination to the lord
thy god.

7:26 neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest
thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and
thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.

8:1 all the commandments which i command thee this day shall ye
observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess
the land which the lord sware unto your fathers.

8:2 and thou shalt remember all the way which the lord thy god led
thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove
thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his
commandments, or no.

8:3 and he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee
with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that
he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the lord doth man live.

8:4 thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell,
these forty years.

8:5 thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth
his son, so the lord thy god chasteneth thee.

8:6 therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the lord thy god, to
walk in his ways, and to fear him.

8:7 for the lord thy god bringeth thee into a good land, a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys
and hills; 8:8 a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees,
and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey; 8:9 a land wherein
thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing
in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou
mayest dig brass.

8:10 when thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the lord
thy god for the good land which he hath given thee.

8:11 beware that thou forget not the lord thy god, in not keeping his
commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which i command
thee this day: 8:12 lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; 8:13 and when thy herds and
thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and
all that thou hast is multiplied; 8:14 then thine heart be lifted up,
and thou forget the lord thy god, which brought thee forth out of the
land of egypt, from the house of bondage; 8:15 who led thee through
that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee
forth water out of the rock of flint; 8:16 who fed thee in the
wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might
humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy
latter end; 8:17 and thou say in thine heart, my power and the might
of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

8:18 but thou shalt remember the lord thy god: for it is he that
giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant
which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

8:19 and it shall be, if thou do at all forget the lord thy god, and
walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, i testify
against you this day that ye shall surely perish.

8:20 as the nations which the lord destroyeth before your face, so
shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of
the lord your god.

9:1 hear, o israel: thou art to pass over jordan this day, to go in to
possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and
fenced up to heaven, 9:2 a people great and tall, the children of the
anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, who can
stand before the children of anak!  9:3 understand therefore this day,
that the lord thy god is he which goeth over before thee; as a
consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down
before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them
quickly, as the lord hath said unto thee.

9:4 speak not thou in thine heart, after that the lord thy god hath
cast them out from before thee, saying, for my righteousness the lord
hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of
these nations the lord doth drive them out from before thee.

9:5 not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart,
dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these
nations the lord thy god doth drive them out from before thee, and
that he may perform the word which the lord sware unto thy fathers,
abraham, isaac, and jacob.

9:6 understand therefore, that the lord thy god giveth thee not this
good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
stiffnecked people.

9:7 remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the lord thy god to
wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of
the land of egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been
rebellious against the lord.

9:8 also in horeb ye provoked the lord to wrath, so that the lord was
angry with you to have destroyed you.

9:9 when i was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone,
even the tables of the covenant which the lord made with you, then i
abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, i neither did eat
bread nor drink water: 9:10 and the lord delivered unto me two tables
of stone written with the finger of god; and on them was written
according to all the words, which the lord spake with you in the mount
out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.

9:11 and it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights,
that the lord gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the
covenant.

9:12 and the lord said unto me, arise, get thee down quickly from
hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of egypt have
corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way
which i commanded them; they have made them a molten image.

9:13 furthermore the lord spake unto me, saying, i have seen this
people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people: 9:14 let me alone,
that i may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven:
and i will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.

9:15 so i turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned
with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.

9:16 and i looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the lord your
god, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out
of the way which the lord had commanded you.

9:17 and i took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and
brake them before your eyes.

9:18 and i fell down before the lord, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights: i did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all
your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the lord,
to provoke him to anger.

9:19 for i was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the
lord was wroth against you to destroy you. but the lord hearkened unto
me at that time also.

9:20 and the lord was very angry with aaron to have destroyed him: and
i prayed for aaron also the same time.

9:21 and i took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it
with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was
as small as dust: and i cast the dust thereof into the brook that
descended out of the mount.

9:22 and at taberah, and at massah, and at kibrothhattaavah, ye
provoked the lord to wrath.

9:23 likewise when the lord sent you from kadeshbarnea, saying, go up
and possess the land which i have given you; then ye rebelled against
the commandment of the lord your god, and ye believed him not, nor
hearkened to his voice.

9:24 ye have been rebellious against the lord from the day that i knew
you.

9:25 thus i fell down before the lord forty days and forty nights, as
i fell down at the first; because the lord had said he would destroy
you.

9:26 i prayed therefore unto the lord, and said, o lord god, destroy
not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through
thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of egypt with a
mighty hand.

9:27 remember thy servants, abraham, isaac, and jacob; look not unto
the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their
sin: 9:28 lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, because the
lord was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them,
and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in
the wilderness.

9:29 yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.

10:1 at that time the lord said unto me, hew thee two tables of stone
like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee
an ark of wood.

10:2 and i will write on the tables the words that were in the first
tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.

10:3 and i made an ark of shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone
like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables
in mine hand.

10:4 and he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the
ten commandments, which the lord spake unto you in the mount out of
the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the lord gave
them unto me.

10:5 and i turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the
tables in the ark which i had made; and there they be, as the lord
commanded me.

10:6 and the children of israel took their journey from beeroth of the
children of jaakan to mosera: there aaron died, and there he was
buried; and eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his
stead.

10:7 from thence they journeyed unto gudgodah; and from gudgodah to
jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

10:8 at that time the lord separated the tribe of levi, to bear the
ark of the covenant of the lord, to stand before the lord to minister
unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

10:9 wherefore levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren;
the lord is his inheritance, according as the lord thy god promised
him.

10:10 and i stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty
days and forty nights; and the lord hearkened unto me at that time
also, and the lord would not destroy thee.

10:11 and the lord said unto me, arise, take thy journey before the
people, that they may go in and possess the land, which i sware unto
their fathers to give unto them.

10:12 and now, israel, what doth the lord thy god require of thee, but
to fear the lord thy god, to walk in all his ways, and to love him,
and to serve the lord thy god with all thy heart and with all thy
soul, 10:13 to keep the commandments of the lord, and his statutes,
which i command thee this day for thy good?  10:14 behold, the heaven
and the heaven of heavens is the lord's thy god, the earth also, with
all that therein is.

10:15 only the lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he
chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this
day.

10:16 circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more
stiffnecked.

10:17 for the lord your god is god of gods, and lord of lords, a great
god, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh
reward: 10:18 he doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and
widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.

10:19 love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the
land of egypt.

10:20 thou shalt fear the lord thy god; him shalt thou serve, and to
him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

10:21 he is thy praise, and he is thy god, that hath done for thee
these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.

10:22 thy fathers went down into egypt with threescore and ten
persons; and now the lord thy god hath made thee as the stars of
heaven for multitude.

11:1 therefore thou shalt love the lord thy god, and keep his charge,
and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.

11:2 and know ye this day: for i speak not with your children which
have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the lord
your god, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,
11:3 and his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of
egypt unto pharaoh the king of egypt, and unto all his land; 11:4 and
what he did unto the army of egypt, unto their horses, and to their
chariots; how he made the water of the red sea to overflow them as
they pursued after you, and how the lord hath destroyed them unto this
day; 11:5 and what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came
into this place; 11:6 and what he did unto dathan and abiram, the sons
of eliab, the son of reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the
substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all israel:
11:7 but your eyes have seen all the great acts of the lord which he
did.

11:8 therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which i command you
this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land,
whither ye go to possess it; 11:9 and that ye may prolong your days in
the land, which the lord sware unto your fathers to give unto them and
to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

11:10 for the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the
land of egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed,
and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: 11:11 but the
land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and
drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 11:12 a land which the lord thy
god careth for: the eyes of the lord thy god are always upon it, from
the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.

11:13 and it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto
my commandments which i command you this day, to love the lord your
god, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
11:14 that i will give you the rain of your land in his due season,
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy
corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.

11:15 and i will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou
mayest eat and be full.

11:16 take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye
turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 11:17 and then the
lord's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye
perish quickly from off the good land which the lord giveth you.

11:18 therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be
as frontlets between your eyes.

11:19 and ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when
thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when
thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

11:20 and thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates: 11:21 that your days may be multiplied, and the
days of your children, in the land which the lord sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.

11:22 for if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which i
command you, to do them, to love the lord your god, to walk in all his
ways, and to cleave unto him; 11:23 then will the lord drive out all
these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations
and mightier than yourselves.

11:24 every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be
yours: from the wilderness and lebanon, from the river, the river
euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.

11:25 there shall no man be able to stand before you: for the lord
your god shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the
land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

11:26 behold, i set before you this day a blessing and a curse; 11:27
a blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the lord your god, which i
command you this day: 11:28 and a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the lord your god, but turn aside out of the way which
i command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not
known.

11:29 and it shall come to pass, when the lord thy god hath brought
thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou
shalt put the blessing upon mount gerizim, and the curse upon mount
ebal.

11:30 are they not on the other side jordan, by the way where the sun
goeth down, in the land of the canaanites, which dwell in the
champaign over against gilgal, beside the plains of moreh?  11:31 for
ye shall pass over jordan to go in to possess the land which the lord
your god giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.

11:32 and ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which
i set before you this day.

12:1 these are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to
do in the land, which the lord god of thy fathers giveth thee to
possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.

12:2 ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and
upon the hills, and under every green tree: 12:3 and ye shall
overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves
with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and
destroy the names of them out of that place.

12:4 ye shall not do so unto the lord your god.

12:5 but unto the place which the lord your god shall choose out of
all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall
ye seek, and thither thou shalt come: 12:6 and thither ye shall bring
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings,
and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: 12:7 and there ye
shall eat before the lord your god, and ye shall rejoice in all that
ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the lord thy
god hath blessed thee.

12:8 ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day,
every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

12:9 for ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance,
which the lord your god giveth you.

12:10 but when ye go over jordan, and dwell in the land which the lord
your god giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all
your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety; 12:11 then there
shall be a place which the lord your god shall choose to cause his
name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that i command you;
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave
offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the
lord: 12:12 and ye shall rejoice before the lord your god, ye, and
your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your
maidservants, and the levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as
he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

12:13 take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in
every place that thou seest: 12:14 but in the place which the lord
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that i command thee.

12:15 notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates,
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the
lord thy god which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may
eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

12:16 only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth
as water.

12:17 thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or
of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy
flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill
offerings, or heave offering of thine hand: 12:18 but thou must eat
them before the lord thy god in the place which the lord thy god shall
choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and
thy maidservant, and the levite that is within thy gates: and thou
shalt rejoice before the lord thy god in all that thou puttest thine
hands unto.

12:19 take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the levite as long as
thou livest upon the earth.

12:20 when the lord thy god shall enlarge thy border, as he hath
promised thee, and thou shalt say, i will eat flesh, because thy soul
longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul
lusteth after.

12:21 if the place which the lord thy god hath chosen to put his name
there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of
thy flock, which the lord hath given thee, as i have commanded thee,
and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.

12:22 even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat
them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.

12:23 only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the
life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.

12:24 thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as
water.

12:25 thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with
thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the
sight of the lord.

12:26 only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt
take, and go unto the place which the lord shall choose: 12:27 and
thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon
the altar of the lord thy god: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall
be poured out upon the altar of the lord thy god, and thou shalt eat
the flesh.

12:28 observe and hear all these words which i command thee, that it
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when
thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the lord thy
god.

12:29 when the lord thy god shall cut off the nations from before
thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them,
and dwellest in their land; 12:30 take heed to thyself that thou be
not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before
thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, how did
these nations serve their gods? even so will i do likewise.

12:31 thou shalt not do so unto the lord thy god: for every
abomination to the lord, which he hateth, have they done unto their
gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the
fire to their gods.

12:32 what thing soever i command you, observe to do it: thou shalt
not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

13:1 if there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
giveth thee a sign or a wonder, 13:2 and the sign or the wonder come
to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, let us go after other
gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; 13:3 thou
shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams: for the lord your god proveth you, to know whether ye love the
lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul.

13:4 ye shall walk after the lord your god, and fear him, and keep his
commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave
unto him.

13:5 and that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to
death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the lord your god,
which brought you out of the land of egypt, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the lord thy
god commanded thee to walk in. so shalt thou put the evil away from
the midst of thee.

13:6 if thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine
own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other
gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers; 13:7 namely,
of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee,
or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth; 13:8 thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 13:9 but thou shalt surely kill
him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterwards the hand of all the people.

13:10 and thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he
hath sought to thrust thee away from the lord thy god, which brought
thee out of the land of egypt, from the house of bondage.

13:11 and all israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you.

13:12 if thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the lord thy
god hath given thee to dwell there, saying, 13:13 certain men, the
children of belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn
the inhabitants of their city, saying, let us go and serve other gods,
which ye have not known; 13:14 then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you; 13:15 thou shalt
surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword,
destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle
thereof, with the edge of the sword.

13:16 and thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the
street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, for the lord thy god: and it shall be an heap for
ever; it shall not be built again.

13:17 and there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand:
that the lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee
mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath
sworn unto thy fathers; 13:18 when thou shalt hearken to the voice of
the lord thy god, to keep all his commandments which i command thee
this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the lord thy god.

14:1 ye are the children of the lord your god: ye shall not cut
yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.

14:2 for thou art an holy people unto the lord thy god, and the lord
hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
nations that are upon the earth.

14:3 thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

14:4 these are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and
the goat, 14:5 the hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the
wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.

14:6 and every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft
into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall
eat.

14:7 nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or
of them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and
the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore
they are unclean unto you.

14:8 and the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the
cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor
touch their dead carcase.

14:9 these ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have
fins and scales shall ye eat: 14:10 and whatsoever hath not fins and
scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.

14:11 of all clean birds ye shall eat.

14:12 but these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the
ossifrage, and the ospray, 14:13 and the glede, and the kite, and the
vulture after his kind, 14:14 and every raven after his kind, 14:15
and the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after
his kind, 14:16 the little owl, and the great owl, and the swan, 14:17
and the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 14:18 and the
stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

14:19 and every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they
shall not be eaten.

14:20 but of all clean fowls ye may eat.

14:21 ye shall not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or
thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto
the lord thy god.

thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

14:22 thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the
field bringeth forth year by year.

14:23 and thou shalt eat before the lord thy god, in the place which
he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy
flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the lord thy god always.

14:24 and if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able
to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the lord thy
god shall choose to set his name there, when the lord thy god hath
blessed thee: 14:25 then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up
the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the lord
thy god shall choose: 14:26 and thou shalt bestow that money for
whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for
wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and
thou shalt eat there before the lord thy god, and thou shalt rejoice,
thou, and thine household, 14:27 and the levite that is within thy
gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

14:28 at the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe
of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:
14:29 and the levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with
thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are
within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the
lord thy god may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou
doest.

15:1 at the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.

15:2 and this is the manner of the release: every creditor that
lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact
it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the
lord's release.

15:3 of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is
thine with thy brother thine hand shall release; 15:4 save when there
shall be no poor among you; for the lord shall greatly bless thee in
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance to
possess it: 15:5 only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the
lord thy god, to observe to do all these commandments which i command
thee this day.

15:6 for the lord thy god blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou
shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou
shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.

15:7 if there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within
any of thy gates in thy land which the lord thy god giveth thee, thou
shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor
brother: 15:8 but thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt
surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.

15:9 beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying,
the seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be
evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry
unto the lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.

15:10 thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved
when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the lord thy
god shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest
thine hand unto.

15:11 for the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore i
command thee, saying, thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy
brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

15:12 and if thy brother, an hebrew man, or an hebrew woman, be sold
unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou
shalt let him go free from thee.

15:13 and when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let
him go away empty: 15:14 thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy
flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that
wherewith the lord thy god hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.

15:15 and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
egypt, and the lord thy god redeemed thee: therefore i command thee
this thing to day.

15:16 and it shall be, if he say unto thee, i will not go away from
thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with
thee; 15:17 then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear
unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. and also unto thy
maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

15:18 it shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away
free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee,
in serving thee six years: and the lord thy god shall bless thee in
all that thou doest.

15:19 all the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock
thou shalt sanctify unto the lord thy god: thou shalt do no work with
the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.

15:20 thou shalt eat it before the lord thy god year by year in the
place which the lord shall choose, thou and thy household.

15:21 and if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind,
or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the lord thy
god.

15:22 thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean
person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.

15:23 only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it
upon the ground as water.

16:1 observe the month of abib, and keep the passover unto the lord
thy god: for in the month of abib the lord thy god brought thee forth
out of egypt by night.

16:2 thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the lord thy
god, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the lord shall
choose to place his name there.

16:3 thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou
eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou
camest forth out of the land of egypt in haste: that thou mayest
remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of egypt all
the days of thy life.

16:4 and there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy
coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which
thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the
morning.

16:5 thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates,
which the lord thy god giveth thee: 16:6 but at the place which the
lord thy god shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt
sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the
season that thou camest forth out of egypt.

16:7 and thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the lord thy
god shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy
tents.

16:8 six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day
shall be a solemn assembly to the lord thy god: thou shalt do no work
therein.

16:9 seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the
seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the
corn.

16:10 and thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the lord thy god
with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt
give unto the lord thy god, according as the lord thy god hath blessed
thee: 16:11 and thou shalt rejoice before the lord thy god, thou, and
thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the
lord thy god hath chosen to place his name there.

16:12 and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in egypt: and
thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

16:13 thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after
that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: 16:14 and thou shalt
rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the levite, the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.

16:15 seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the lord thy god
in the place which the lord shall choose: because the lord thy god
shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine
hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

16:16 three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the lord
thy god in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened
bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and
they shall not appear before the lord empty: 16:17 every man shall
give as he is able, according to the blessing of the lord thy god
which he hath given thee.

16:18 judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which
the lord thy god giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall
judge the people with just judgment.

16:19 thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous.

16:20 that which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou
mayest live, and inherit the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

16:21 thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the
altar of the lord thy god, which thou shalt make thee.

16:22 neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the lord thy god
hateth.

17:1 thou shalt not sacrifice unto the lord thy god any bullock, or
sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an
abomination unto the lord thy god.

17:2 if there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the
lord thy god giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness
in the sight of the lord thy god, in transgressing his covenant, 17:3
and hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which i have not
commanded; 17:4 and it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and
enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain,
that such abomination is wrought in israel: 17:5 then shalt thou bring
forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing,
unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with
stones, till they die.

17:6 at the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that
is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he
shall not be put to death.

17:7 the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hands of all the people. so thou shalt put
the evil away from among you.

17:8 if there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise,
and get thee up into the place which the lord thy god shall choose;
17:9 and thou shalt come unto the priests the levites, and unto the
judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew
thee the sentence of judgment: 17:10 and thou shalt do according to
the sentence, which they of that place which the lord shall choose
shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that
they inform thee: 17:11 according to the sentence of the law which
they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall
tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

17:12 and the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken
unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the lord thy
god, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put
away the evil from israel.

17:13 and all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

17:14 when thou art come unto the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, i
will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;
17:15 thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the lord thy
god shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over
thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother.

17:16 but he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the
people to return to egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses:
forasmuch as the lord hath said unto you, ye shall henceforth return
no more that way.

17:17 neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn
not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and
gold.

17:18 and it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which
is before the priests the levites: 17:19 and it shall be with him, and
he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the lord his god, to keep all the words of this law and these
statutes, to do them: 17:20 that his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of israel.

18:1 the priests the levites, and all the tribe of levi, shall have no
part nor inheritance with israel: they shall eat the offerings of the
lord made by fire, and his inheritance.

18:2 therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren:
the lord is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.

18:3 and this shall be the priest's due from the people, from them
that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give
unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.

18:4 the firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil,
and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.

18:5 for the lord thy god hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to
stand to minister in the name of the lord, him and his sons for ever.

18:6 and if a levite come from any of thy gates out of all israel,
where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the
place which the lord shall choose; 18:7 then he shall minister in the
name of the lord his god, as all his brethren the levites do, which
stand there before the lord.

18:8 they shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of
the sale of his patrimony.

18:9 when thou art come into the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those
nations.

18:10 there shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or
an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch.

18:11 or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard,
or a necromancer.

18:12 for all that do these things are an abomination unto the lord:
and because of these abominations the lord thy god doth drive them out
from before thee.

18:13 thou shalt be perfect with the lord thy god.

18:14 for these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto
observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the lord thy
god hath not suffered thee so to do.

18:15 the lord thy god will raise up unto thee a prophet from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall
hearken; 18:16 according to all that thou desiredst of the lord thy
god in horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, let me not hear again
the voice of the lord my god, neither let me see this great fire any
more, that i die not.

18:17 and the lord said unto me, they have well spoken that which they
have spoken.

18:18 i will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like
unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto
them all that i shall command him.

18:19 and it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto
my words which he shall speak in my name, i will require it of him.

18:20 but the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name,
which i have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

18:21 and if thou say in thine heart, how shall we know the word which
the lord hath not spoken?  18:22 when a prophet speaketh in the name
of the lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

19:1 when the lord thy god hath cut off the nations, whose land the
lord thy god giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in
their cities, and in their houses; 19:2 thou shalt separate three
cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the lord thy god
giveth thee to possess it.

19:3 thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land,
which the lord thy god giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that
every slayer may flee thither.

19:4 and this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither,
that he may live: whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he
hated not in time past; 19:5 as when a man goeth into the wood with
his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe
to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of
those cities, and live: 19:6 lest the avenger of the blood pursue the
slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.

19:7 wherefore i command thee, saying, thou shalt separate three
cities for thee.

19:8 and if the lord thy god enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto
thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto
thy fathers; 19:9 if thou shalt keep all these commandments to do
them, which i command thee this day, to love the lord thy god, and to
walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee,
beside these three: 19:10 that innocent blood be not shed in thy land,
which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be
upon thee.

19:11 but if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and
rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth
into one of these cities: 19:12 then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

19:13 thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt
of innocent blood from israel, that it may go well with thee.

19:14 thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in
the land that the lord thy god giveth thee to possess it.

19:15 one witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or
for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be
established.

19:16 if a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him that which is wrong; 19:17 then both the men, between whom the
controversy is, shall stand before the lord, before the priests and
the judges, which shall be in those days; 19:18 and the judges shall
make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false
witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; 19:19 then
shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother:
so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.

19:20 and those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

19:21 and thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

20:1 when thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest
horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the lord thy god is with thee, which brought thee up out of
the land of egypt.

20:2 and it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
priest shall approach and speak unto the people, 20:3 and shall say
unto them, hear, o israel, ye approach this day unto battle against
your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them; 20:4 for the lord your god is
he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save
you.

20:5 and the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, what man is
there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him
go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
dedicate it.

20:6 and what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet
eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in
the battle, and another man eat of it.

20:7 and what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not
taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the
battle, and another man take her.

20:8 and the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they
shall say, what man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him
go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as well
as his heart.

20:9 and it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking
unto the people that they shall make captains of the armies to lead
the people.

20:10 when thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.

20:11 and it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

20:12 and if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: 20:13 and when the lord thy
god hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male
thereof with the edge of the sword: 20:14 but the women, and the
little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the
spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which the lord thy god hath given thee.

20:15 thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.

20:16 but of the cities of these people, which the lord thy god doth
give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that
breatheth: 20:17 but thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the
hittites, and the amorites, the canaanites, and the perizzites, the
hivites, and the jebusites; as the lord thy god hath commanded thee:
20:18 that they teach you not to do after all their abominations,
which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the
lord your god.

20:19 when thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war
against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by
forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou
shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's life) to
employ them in the siege: 20:20 only the trees which thou knowest that
they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it be subdued.

21:1 if one be found slain in the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath
slain him: 21:2 then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and
they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is
slain: 21:3 and it shall be, that the city which is next unto the
slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which
hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 21:4
and the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the
heifer's neck there in the valley: 21:5 and the priests the sons of
levi shall come near; for them the lord thy god hath chosen to
minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the lord; and by their
word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried: 21:6 and all
the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash
their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley: 21:7 and
they shall answer and say, our hands have not shed this blood, neither
have our eyes seen it.

21:8 be merciful, o lord, unto thy people israel, whom thou hast
redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of israel's
charge. and the blood shall be forgiven them.

21:9 so shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among
you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the lord.

21:10 when thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the lord
thy god hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them
captive, 21:11 and seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and
hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife; 21:12
then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shall shave her
head, and pare her nails; 21:13 and she shall put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go
in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

21:14 and it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt
let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for
money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast
humbled her.

21:15 if a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and
they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if
the firstborn son be hers that was hated: 21:16 then it shall be, when
he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make
the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is
indeed the firstborn: 21:17 but he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he
hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the
firstborn is his.

21:18 if a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey
the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when
they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: 21:19 then shall
his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the
elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; 21:20 and they
shall say unto the elders of his city, this our son is stubborn and
rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a
drunkard.

21:21 and all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all israel shall
hear, and fear.

21:22 and if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to
be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree: 21:23 his body shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him
that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of god;) that thy land be
not defiled, which the lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance.

22:1 thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and
hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto
thy brother.

22:2 and if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him
not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be
with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it
to him again.

22:3 in like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do
with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother's, which he
hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest
not hide thyself.

22:4 thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or his ox fall down by the
way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift
them up again.

22:5 the woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for all that do so are
abomination unto the lord thy god.

22:6 if a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam
with the young: 22:7 but thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and
take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest prolong thy days.

22:8 when thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement
for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man
fall from thence.

22:9 thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit
of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be
defiled.

22:10 thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.

22:11 thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and
linen together.

22:12 thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy
vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

22:13 if any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, 22:14
and give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name
upon her, and say, i took this woman, and when i came to her, i found
her not a maid: 22:15 then shall the father of the damsel, and her
mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto
the elders of the city in the gate: 22:16 and the damsel's father
shall say unto the elders, i gave my daughter unto this man to wife,
and he hateth her; 22:17 and, lo, he hath given occasions of speech
against her, saying, i found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these
are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. and they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.

22:18 and the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise
him; 22:19 and they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver,
and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought
up an evil name upon a virgin of israel: and she shall be his wife; he
may not put her away all his days.

22:20 but if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not
found for the damsel: 22:21 then they shall bring out the damsel to
the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone
her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in
israel, to play the whore in her father's house: so shalt thou put
evil away from among you.

22:22 if a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then
they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and
the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from israel.

22:23 if a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a
man find her in the city, and lie with her; 22:24 then ye shall bring
them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with
stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the
city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so
thou shalt put away evil from among you.

22:25 but if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man
force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall
die.

22:26 but unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the
damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his
neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter: 22:27 for he found
her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none
to save her.

22:28 if a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; 22:29 then
the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel's father fifty
shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled
her, he may not put her away all his days.

22:30 a man shall not take his father's wife, nor discover his
father's skirt.

23:1 he that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut
off, shall not enter into the congregation of the lord.

23:2 a bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the lord; even
to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of
the lord.

23:3 an ammonite or moabite shall not enter into the congregation of
the lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the lord for ever: 23:4 because they met you not with
bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of egypt; and
because they hired against thee balaam the son of beor of pethor of
mesopotamia, to curse thee.

23:5 nevertheless the lord thy god would not hearken unto balaam; but
the lord thy god turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because
the lord thy god loved thee.

23:6 thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever.

23:7 thou shalt not abhor an edomite; for he is thy brother: thou
shalt not abhor an egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.

23:8 the children that are begotten of them shall enter into the
congregation of the lord in their third generation.

23:9 when the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

23:10 if there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of
uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of
the camp, he shall not come within the camp: 23:11 but it shall be,
when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the
sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.

23:12 thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou
shalt go forth abroad: 23:13 and thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou
shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh
from thee: 23:14 for the lord thy god walketh in the midst of thy
camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee;
therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee.

23:15 thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is
escaped from his master unto thee: 23:16 he shall dwell with thee,
even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy
gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

23:17 there shall be no whore of the daughters of israel, nor a
sodomite of the sons of israel.

23:18 thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the house of the lord thy god for any vow: for even both these
are abomination unto the lord thy god.

23:19 thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money,
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury: 23:20
unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou
shalt not lend upon usury: that the lord thy god may bless thee in all
that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

23:21 when thou shalt vow a vow unto the lord thy god, thou shalt not
slack to pay it: for the lord thy god will surely require it of thee;
and it would be sin in thee.

23:22 but if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.

23:23 that which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform;
even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the lord
thy god, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

23:24 when thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest
eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any
in thy vessel.

23:25 when thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a
sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn.

24:1 when a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to
pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some
uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and
give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

24:2 and when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be
another man's wife.

24:3 and if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of
divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his
house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;
24:4 her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again
to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination
before the lord: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the
lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance.

24:5 when a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war,
neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at
home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.

24:6 no man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge:
for he taketh a man's life to pledge.

24:7 if a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief
shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.

24:8 take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently,
and do according to all that the priests the levites shall teach you:
as i commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

24:9 remember what the lord thy god did unto miriam by the way, after
that ye were come forth out of egypt.

24:10 when thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go
into his house to fetch his pledge.

24:11 thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend
shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.

24:12 and if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
24:13 in any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun
goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and
it shall be righteousness unto thee before the lord thy god.

24:14 thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy,
whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy
land within thy gates: 24:15 at his day thou shalt give him his hire,
neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his
heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the lord, and it be sin
unto thee.

24:16 the fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be
put to death for his own sin.

24:17 thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the
fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge: 24:18 but thou shalt
remember that thou wast a bondman in egypt, and the lord thy god
redeemed thee thence: therefore i command thee to do this thing.

24:19 when thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast
forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it
shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that
the lord thy god may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.

24:20 when thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the
boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and
for the widow.

24:21 when thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not
glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless,
and for the widow.

24:22 and thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of
egypt: therefore i command thee to do this thing.

25:1 if there be a controversy between men, and they come unto
judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the
righteous, and condemn the wicked.

25:2 and it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that
the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his
face, according to his fault, by a certain number.

25:3 forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should
exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother
should seem vile unto thee.

25:4 thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.

25:5 if brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no
child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger:
her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to
wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her.

25:6 and it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall
succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not
put out of israel.

25:7 and if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his
brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, my
husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in
israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's brother.

25:8 then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him:
and if he stand to it, and say, i like not to take her; 25:9 then
shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders,
and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall
answer and say, so shall it be done unto that man that will not build
up his brother's house.

25:10 and his name shall be called in israel, the house of him that
hath his shoe loosed.

25:11 when men strive together one with another, and the wife of the
one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him
that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the
secrets: 25:12 then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not
pity her.

25:13 thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a
small.

25:14 thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and
a small.

25:15 but thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and
just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the
land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

25:16 for all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are
an abomination unto the lord thy god.

25:17 remember what amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out of egypt; 25:18 how he met thee by the way, and smote the
hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not god.

25:19 therefore it shall be, when the lord thy god hath given thee
rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the lord
thy god giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt
blot out the remembrance of amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not
forget it.

26:1 and it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the
lord thy god giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and
dwellest therein; 26:2 that thou shalt take of the first of all the
fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the lord
thy god giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto
the place which the lord thy god shall choose to place his name there.

26:3 and thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days,
and say unto him, i profess this day unto the lord thy god, that i am
come unto the country which the lord sware unto our fathers for to
give us.

26:4 and the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set
it down before the altar of the lord thy god.

26:5 and thou shalt speak and say before the lord thy god, a syrian
ready to perish was my father, and he went down into egypt, and
sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty,
and populous: 26:6 and the egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted
us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 26:7 and when we cried unto the
lord god of our fathers, the lord heard our voice, and looked on our
affliction, and our labour, and our oppression: 26:8 and the lord
brought us forth out of egypt with a mighty hand, and with an
outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and
with wonders: 26:9 and he hath brought us into this place, and hath
given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:10 and now, behold, i have brought the firstfruits of the land,
which thou, o lord, hast given me. and thou shalt set it before the
lord thy god, and worship before the lord thy god: 26:11 and thou
shalt rejoice in every good thing which the lord thy god hath given
unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the levite, and the
stranger that is among you.

26:12 when thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given
it unto the levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that
they may eat within thy gates, and be filled; 26:13 then thou shalt
say before the lord thy god, i have brought away the hallowed things
out of mine house, and also have given them unto the levite, and unto
the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all
thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: i have not transgressed
thy commandments, neither have i forgotten them.

26:14 i have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have i taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for
the dead: but i have hearkened to the voice of the lord my god, and
have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

26:15 look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest
unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

26:16 this day the lord thy god hath commanded thee to do these
statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

26:17 thou hast avouched the lord this day to be thy god, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 26:18 and the lord hath
avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised
thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments; 26:19 and to
make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in
name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the
lord thy god, as he hath spoken.

27:1 and moses with the elders of israel commanded the people, saying,
keep all the commandments which i command you this day.

27:2 and it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over jordan unto
the land which the lord thy god giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee
up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 27:3 and thou shalt
write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over,
that thou mayest go in unto the land which the lord thy god giveth
thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the lord god of thy
fathers hath promised thee.

27:4 therefore it shall be when ye be gone over jordan, that ye shall
set up these stones, which i command you this day, in mount ebal, and
thou shalt plaister them with plaister.

27:5 and there shalt thou build an altar unto the lord thy god, an
altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.

27:6 thou shalt build the altar of the lord thy god of whole stones:
and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the lord thy god:
27:7 and thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and
rejoice before the lord thy god.

27:8 and thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly.

27:9 and moses and the priests the levites spake unto all israel,
saying, take heed, and hearken, o israel; this day thou art become the
people of the lord thy god.

27:10 thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the lord thy god, and do
his commandments and his statutes, which i command thee this day.

27:11 and moses charged the people the same day, saying, 27:12 these
shall stand upon mount gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come
over jordan; simeon, and levi, and judah, and issachar, and joseph,
and benjamin: 27:13 and these shall stand upon mount ebal to curse;
reuben, gad, and asher, and zebulun, dan, and naphtali.

27:14 and the levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of israel
with a loud voice, 27:15 cursed be the man that maketh any graven or
molten image, an abomination unto the lord, the work of the hands of
the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. and all the people
shall answer and say, amen.

27:16 cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. and
all the people shall say, amen.

27:17 cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark. and all the
people shall say, amen.

27:18 cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. and
all the people shall say, amen.

27:19 cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow. and all the people shall say, amen.

27:20 cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife; because he
uncovereth his father's skirt. and all the people shall say, amen.

27:21 cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. and all the
people shall say, amen.

27:22 cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his
father, or the daughter of his mother. and all the people shall say,
amen.

27:23 cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. and all the
people shall say, amen.

27:24 cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. and all the
people shall say, amen.

27:25 cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. and
all the people shall say, amen.

27:26 cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
them. and all the people shall say, amen.

28:1 and it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto
the voice of the lord thy god, to observe and to do all his
commandments which i command thee this day, that the lord thy god will
set thee on high above all nations of the earth: 28:2 and all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken
unto the voice of the lord thy god.

28:3 blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in
the field.

28:4 blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the
flocks of thy sheep.

28:5 blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:6 blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:7 the lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to
be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way,
and flee before thee seven ways.

28:8 the lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses,
and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee
in the land which the lord thy god giveth thee.

28:9 the lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he
hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the lord
thy god, and walk in his ways.

28:10 and all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the name of the lord; and they shall be afraid of thee.

28:11 and the lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of
thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy
ground, in the land which the lord sware unto thy fathers to give
thee.

28:12 the lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to
give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work
of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt
not borrow.

28:13 and the lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and
thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou
hearken unto the commandments of the lord thy god, which i command
thee this day, to observe and to do them: 28:14 and thou shalt not go
aside from any of the words which i command thee this day, to the
right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.

28:15 but it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the lord thy god, to observe to do all his commandments and
his statutes which i command thee this day; that all these curses
shall come upon thee, and overtake thee: 28:16 cursed shalt thou be in
the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.

28:17 cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.

28:18 cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.

28:19 cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou
be when thou goest out.

28:20 the lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in
all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be
destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of
thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

28:21 the lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he
have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess
it.

28:22 the lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever,
and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the
sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee
until thou perish.

28:23 and thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the
earth that is under thee shall be iron.

28:24 the lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from
heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

28:25 the lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies:
thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before
them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

28:26 and thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and
unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.

28:27 the lord will smite thee with the botch of egypt, and with the
emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not
be healed.

28:28 the lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonishment of heart: 28:29 and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and
thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall
save thee.

28:30 thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her:
thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou
shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.

28:31 thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not
eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy
face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto
thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.

28:32 thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people,
and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day
long; and there shall be no might in thine hand.

28:33 the fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which
thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed
alway: 28:34 so that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shalt see.

28:35 the lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a
sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the
top of thy head.

28:36 the lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set
over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.

28:37 and thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
among all nations whither the lord shall lead thee.

28:38 thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather
but little in; for the locust shall consume it.

28:39 thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither
drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat
them.

28:40 thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou
shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his
fruit.

28:41 thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy
them; for they shall go into captivity.

28:42 all thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.

28:43 the stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very
high; and thou shalt come down very low.

28:44 he shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall
be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

28:45 moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue
thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou
hearkenedst not unto the voice of the lord thy god, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee: 28:46 and they
shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for
ever.

28:47 because thou servedst not the lord thy god with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; 28:48
therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want
of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he
have destroyed thee.

28:49 the lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the
end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue
thou shalt not understand; 28:50 a nation of fierce countenance, which
shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:
28:51 and he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy
land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either
corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy
sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

28:52 and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy
land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy
land, which the lord thy god hath given thee.

28:53 and thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
sons and of thy daughters, which the lord thy god hath given thee, in
the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee: 28:54 so that the man that is tender among you, and
very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward
the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he
shall leave: 28:55 so that he will not give to any of them of the
flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left
him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee in all thy gates.

28:56 the tender and delicate woman among you, which would not
adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness
and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom,
and toward her son, and toward her daughter, 28:57 and toward her
young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her
children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all
things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy
shall distress thee in thy gates.

28:58 if thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that
are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and
fearful name, the lord thy god; 28:59 then the lord will make thy
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues,
and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.

28:60 moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of egypt,
which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.

28:61 also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in
the book of this law, them will the lord bring upon thee, until thou
be destroyed.

28:62 and ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars
of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of
the lord thy god.

28:63 and it shall come to pass, that as the lord rejoiced over you to
do you good, and to multiply you; so the lord will rejoice over you to
destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from
off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

28:64 and the lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one
end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other
gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and
stone.

28:65 and among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall
the sole of thy foot have rest: but the lord shall give thee there a
trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind: 28:66 and
thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and
night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life: 28:67 in the morning
thou shalt say, would god it were even! and at even thou shalt say,
would god it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

28:68 and the lord shall bring thee into egypt again with ships, by
the way whereof i spake unto thee, thou shalt see it no more again:
and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

29:1 these are the words of the covenant, which the lord commanded
moses to make with the children of israel in the land of moab, beside
the covenant which he made with them in horeb.

29:2 and moses called unto all israel, and said unto them, ye have
seen all that the lord did before your eyes in the land of egypt unto
pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; 29:3 the
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those
great miracles: 29:4 yet the lord hath not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

29:5 and i have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes
are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy
foot.

29:6 ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong
drink: that ye might know that i am the lord your god.

29:7 and when ye came unto this place, sihon the king of heshbon, and
og the king of bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote
them: 29:8 and we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto
the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to the half tribe of manasseh.

29:9 keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do.

29:10 ye stand this day all of you before the lord your god; your
captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the
men of israel, 29:11 your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger
that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy
water: 29:12 that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the lord thy
god, and into his oath, which the lord thy god maketh with thee this
day: 29:13 that he may establish thee to day for a people unto
himself, and that he may be unto thee a god, as he hath said unto
thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and
to jacob.

29:14 neither with you only do i make this covenant and this oath;
29:15 but with him that standeth here with us this day before the lord
our god, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 29:16
(for ye know how we have dwelt in the land of egypt; and how we came
through the nations which ye passed by; 29:17 and ye have seen their
abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which
were among them:) 29:18 lest there should be among you man, or woman,
or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the lord
our god, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should
be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood; 29:19 and it come
to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, i shall have peace, though i walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: 29:20 the
lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this book shall lie upon him, and the lord shall blot out
his name from under heaven.

29:21 and the lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes
of israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are
written in this book of the law: 29:22 so that the generation to come
of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that
shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of
that land, and the sicknesses which the lord hath laid upon it; 29:23
and that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like
the overthrow of sodom, and gomorrah, admah, and zeboim, which the
lord overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath: 29:24 even all nations
shall say, wherefore hath the lord done thus unto this land? what
meaneth the heat of this great anger?  29:25 then men shall say,
because they have forsaken the covenant of the lord god of their
fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the
land of egypt: 29:26 for they went and served other gods, and
worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given
unto them: 29:27 and the anger of the lord was kindled against this
land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:
29:28 and the lord rooted them out of their land in anger, and in
wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as
it is this day.

29:29 the secret things belong unto the lord our god: but those things
which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that
we may do all the words of this law.

30:1 and it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon
thee, the blessing and the curse, which i have set before thee, and
thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the lord
thy god hath driven thee, 30:2 and shalt return unto the lord thy god,
and shalt obey his voice according to all that i command thee this
day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul; 30:3 that then the lord thy god will turn thy captivity, and
have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all
the nations, whither the lord thy god hath scattered thee.

30:4 if any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven,
from thence will the lord thy god gather thee, and from thence will he
fetch thee: 30:5 and the lord thy god will bring thee into the land
which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do
thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

30:6 and the lord thy god will circumcise thine heart, and the heart
of thy seed, to love the lord thy god with all thine heart, and with
all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

30:7 and the lord thy god will put all these curses upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.

30:8 and thou shalt return and obey the voice of the lord, and do all
his commandments which i command thee this day.

30:9 and the lord thy god will make thee plenteous in every work of
thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle,
and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the lord will again
rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers: 30:10 if
thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the lord thy god, to keep his
commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the
law, and if thou turn unto the lord thy god with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul.

30:11 for this commandment which i command thee this day, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off.

30:12 it is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do
it?  30:13 neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, who
shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear
it, and do it?  30:14 but the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

30:15 see, i have set before thee this day life and good, and death
and evil; 30:16 in that i command thee this day to love the lord thy
god, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his
statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and
the lord thy god shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

30:17 but if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but
shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them; 30:18 i
denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye
shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over
jordan to go to possess it.

30:19 i call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that i
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live: 30:20 that thou
mayest love the lord thy god, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and
that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length
of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the lord sware
unto thy fathers, to abraham, to isaac, and to jacob, to give them.

31:1 and moses went and spake these words unto all israel.

31:2 and he said unto them, i am an hundred and twenty years old this
day; i can no more go out and come in: also the lord hath said unto
me, thou shalt not go over this jordan.

31:3 the lord thy god, he will go over before thee, and he will
destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them:
and joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the lord hath said.

31:4 and the lord shall do unto them as he did to sihon and to og,
kings of the amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.

31:5 and the lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which i have commanded
you.

31:6 be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the lord thy god, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

31:7 and moses called unto joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all israel, be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the lord hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

31:8 and the lord, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed.

31:9 and moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the lord, and unto
all the elders of israel.

31:10 and moses commanded them, saying, at the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 when all israel is come to appear before the lord
thy god in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law
before all israel in their hearing.

31:12 gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the lord your god, and observe to do all the words
of this law: 31:13 and that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the lord your god, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over jordan to possess it.

31:14 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thy days approach that
thou must die: call joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that i may give him a charge. and moses and
joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

31:15 and the lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.

31:16 and the lord said unto moses, behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which i have made with them.

31:17 then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and i
will forsake them, and i will hide my face from them, and they shall
be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that
they will say in that day, are not these evils come upon us, because
our god is not among us?  31:18 and i will surely hide my face in that
day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned unto other gods.

31:19 now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the
children of israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a
witness for me against the children of israel.

31:20 for when i shall have brought them into the land which i sware
unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall
have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant.

31:21 and it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for i
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before i have
brought them into the land which i sware.

31:22 moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of israel.

31:23 and he gave joshua the son of nun a charge, and said, be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of israel
into the land which i sware unto them: and i will be with thee.

31:24 and it came to pass, when moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 that
moses commanded the levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
lord, saying, 31:26 take this book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the lord your god, that it may be there
for a witness against thee.

31:27 for i know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while i am
yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the lord;
and how much more after my death?  31:28 gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that i may speak these words in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.

31:29 for i know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves, and turn aside from the way which i have commanded you;
and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil
in the sight of the lord, to provoke him to anger through the work of
your hands.

31:30 and moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of israel
the words of this song, until they were ended.

32:1 give ear, o ye heavens, and i will speak; and hear, o earth, the
words of my mouth.

32:2 my doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass: 32:3 because i will publish the name of the lord: ascribe
ye greatness unto our god.

32:4 he is the rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
judgment: a god of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.

32:5 they have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.

32:6 do ye thus requite the lord, o foolish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
established thee?  32:7 remember the days of old, consider the years
of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee.

32:8 when the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the sons of adam, he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of israel.

32:9 for the lord's portion is his people; jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.

32:10 he found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye.

32:11 as an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 so the lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with him.

32:13 he made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might
eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of
the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 32:14 butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure
blood of the grape.

32:15 but jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook god which
made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.

32:16 they provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
abominations provoked they him to anger.

32:17 they sacrificed unto devils, not to god; to gods whom they knew
not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

32:18 of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast
forgotten god that formed thee.

32:19 and when the lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.

32:20 and he said, i will hide my face from them, i will see what
their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children
in whom is no faith.

32:21 they have moved me to jealousy with that which is not god; they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and i will move them to
jealousy with those which are not a people; i will provoke them to
anger with a foolish nation.

32:22 for a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains.

32:23 i will heap mischiefs upon them; i will spend mine arrows upon
them.

32:24 they shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat,
and with bitter destruction: i will also send the teeth of beasts upon
them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.

32:25 the sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray
hairs.

32:26 i said, i would scatter them into corners, i would make the
remembrance of them to cease from among men: 32:27 were it not that i
feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say, our hand is high, and
the lord hath not done all this.

32:28 for they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any
understanding in them.

32:29 o that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end!  32:30 how should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their rock had
sold them, and the lord had shut them up?  32:31 for their rock is not
as our rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.

32:32 for their vine is of the vine of sodom, and of the fields of
gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:
32:33 their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of
asps.

32:34 is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
treasures?  32:35 to me belongeth vengeance and recompence; their foot
shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that shall come upon them make haste.

32:36 for the lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up, or left.

32:37 and he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, 32:38 which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and
be your protection.

32:39 see now that i, even i, am he, and there is no god with me: i
kill, and i make alive; i wound, and i heal: neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand.

32:40 for i lift up my hand to heaven, and say, i live for ever.

32:41 if i whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment; i will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me.

32:42 i will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.

32:43 rejoice, o ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the
blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries,
and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.

32:44 and moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears
of the people, he, and hoshea the son of nun.

32:45 and moses made an end of speaking all these words to all israel:
32:46 and he said unto them, set your hearts unto all the words which
i testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law.

32:47 for it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye
go over jordan to possess it.

32:48 and the lord spake unto moses that selfsame day, saying, 32:49
get thee up into this mountain abarim, unto mount nebo, which is in
the land of moab, that is over against jericho; and behold the land of
canaan, which i give unto the children of israel for a possession:
32:50 and die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto
thy people; as aaron thy brother died in mount hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 because ye trespassed against me among the
children of israel at the waters of meribahkadesh, in the wilderness
of zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
israel.

32:52 yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which i give the children of israel.

33:1 and this is the blessing, wherewith moses the man of god blessed
the children of israel before his death.

33:2 and he said, the lord came from sinai, and rose up from seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.

33:3 yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.

33:4 moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of jacob.

33:5 and he was king in jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the
tribes of israel were gathered together.

33:6 let reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.

33:7 and this is the blessing of judah: and he said, hear, lord, the
voice of judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be
sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.

33:8 and of levi he said, let thy thummim and thy urim be with thy
holy one, whom thou didst prove at massah, and with whom thou didst
strive at the waters of meribah; 33:9 who said unto his father and to
his mother, i have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word,
and kept thy covenant.

33:10 they shall teach jacob thy judgments, and israel thy law: they
shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
altar.

33:11 bless, lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again.

33:12 and of benjamin he said, the beloved of the lord shall dwell in
safety by him; and the lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders.

33:13 and of joseph he said, blessed of the lord be his land, for the
precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath, 33:14 and for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun,
and for the precious things put forth by the moon, 33:15 and for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of
the lasting hills, 33:16 and for the precious things of the earth and
fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush:
let the blessing come upon the head of joseph, and upon the top of the
head of him that was separated from his brethren.

33:17 his glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns
are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people
together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of
ephraim, and they are the thousands of manasseh.

33:18 and of zebulun he said, rejoice, zebulun, in thy going out; and,
issachar, in thy tents.

33:19 they shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall
offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the
abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.

33:20 and of gad he said, blessed be he that enlargeth gad: he
dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.

33:21 and he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a
portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of
the people, he executed the justice of the lord, and his judgments
with israel.

33:22 and of dan he said, dan is a lion's whelp: he shall leap from
bashan.

33:23 and of naphtali he said, o naphtali, satisfied with favour, and
full with the blessing of the lord: possess thou the west and the
south.

33:24 and of asher he said, let asher be blessed with children; let
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.

33:25 thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be.

33:26 there is none like unto the god of jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.

33:27 the eternal god is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, destroy them.

33:28 israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew.

33:29 happy art thou, o israel: who is like unto thee, o people saved
by the lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places.

34:1 and moses went up from the plains of moab unto the mountain of
nebo, to the top of pisgah, that is over against jericho. and the lord
shewed him all the land of gilead, unto dan, 34:2 and all naphtali,
and the land of ephraim, and manasseh, and all the land of judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 and the south, and the plain of the valley of
jericho, the city of palm trees, unto zoar.

34:4 and the lord said unto him, this is the land which i sware unto
abraham, unto isaac, and unto jacob, saying, i will give it unto thy
seed: i have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither.

34:5 so moses the servant of the lord died there in the land of moab,
according to the word of the lord.

34:6 and he buried him in a valley in the land of moab, over against
bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.

34:7 and moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

34:8 and the children of israel wept for moses in the plains of moab
thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for moses were ended.

34:9 and joshua the son of nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of israel
hearkened unto him, and did as the lord commanded moses.

34:10 and there arose not a prophet since in israel like unto moses,
whom the lord knew face to face, 34:11 in all the signs and the
wonders, which the lord sent him to do in the land of egypt to
pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, 34:12 and in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which moses shewed
in the sight of all israel.




the book of joshua


1:1 now after the death of moses the servant of the lord it came to
pass, that the lord spake unto joshua the son of nun, moses' minister,
saying, 1:2 moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over
this jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which i do give
to them, even to the children of israel.

1:3 every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
i given unto you, as i said unto moses.

1:4 from the wilderness and this lebanon even unto the great river,
the river euphrates, all the land of the hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.

1:5 there shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days
of thy life: as i was with moses, so i will be with thee: i will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee.

1:6 be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou
divide for an inheritance the land, which i sware unto their fathers
to give them.

1:7 only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe
to do according to all the law, which moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosper withersoever thou goest.

1:8 this book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.

1:9 have not i commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the lord thy god is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.

1:10 then joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
pass through the host, and command the people, saying, prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the lord your god giveth you to possess
it.

1:12 and to the reubenites, and to the gadites, and to half the tribe
of manasseh, spake joshua, saying, 1:13 remember the word which moses
the servant of the lord commanded you, saying, the lord your god hath
given you rest, and hath given you this land.

1:14 your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which moses gave you on this side jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 until the lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the lord your
god giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which moses the lord's servant gave you on
this side jordan toward the sunrising.

1:16 and they answered joshua, saying, all that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

1:17 according as we hearkened unto moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the lord thy god be with thee, as he was with
moses.

1:18 whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall
be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.

2:1 and joshua the son of nun sent out of shittim two men to spy
secretly, saying, go view the land, even jericho. and they went, and
came into an harlot's house, named rahab, and lodged there.

2:2 and it was told the king of jericho, saying, behold, there came
men in hither to night of the children of israel to search out the
country.

2:3 and the king of jericho sent unto rahab, saying, bring forth the
men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for
they be come to search out all the country.

2:4 and the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, there
came men unto me, but i wist not whence they were: 2:5 and it came to
pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that
the men went out: whither the men went i wot not: pursue after them
quickly; for ye shall overtake them.

2:6 but she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.

2:7 and the men pursued after them the way to jordan unto the fords:
and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut
the gate.

2:8 and before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the
roof; 2:9 and she said unto the men, i know that the lord hath given
you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabitants of the land faint because of you.

2:10 for we have heard how the lord dried up the water of the red sea
for you, when ye came out of egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings
of the amorites, that were on the other side jordan, sihon and og,
whom ye utterly destroyed.

2:11 and as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt,
neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you:
for the lord your god, he is god in heaven above, and in earth
beneath.

2:12 now therefore, i pray you, swear unto me by the lord, since i
have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my
father's house, and give me a true token: 2:13 and that ye will save
alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and
all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.

2:14 and the men answered her, our life for yours, if ye utter not
this our business. and it shall be, when the lord hath given us the
land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.

2:15 then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her
house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.

2:16 and she said unto them, get you to the mountain, lest the
pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the
pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.

2:17 and the men said unto her, we will be blameless of this thine
oath which thou hast made us swear.

2:18 behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of
scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou
shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy
father's household, home unto thee.

2:19 and it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy
house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will
be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood
shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.

2:20 and if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of
thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.

2:21 and she said, according unto your words, so be it. and she sent
them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the
window.

2:22 and they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three
days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not.

2:23 so the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and
passed over, and came to joshua the son of nun, and told him all
things that befell them: 2:24 and they said unto joshua, truly the
lord hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the
inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.

3:1 and joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from
shittim, and came to jordan, he and all the children of israel, and
lodged there before they passed over.

3:2 and it came to pass after three days, that the officers went
through the host; 3:3 and they commanded the people, saying, when ye
see the ark of the covenant of the lord your god, and the priests the
levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it.

3:4 yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.

3:5 and joshua said unto the people, sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the lord will do wonders among you.

3:6 and joshua spake unto the priests, saying, take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over before the people. and they took up the ark of
the covenant, and went before the people.

3:7 and the lord said unto joshua, this day will i begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all israel, that they may know that, as i was
with moses, so i will be with thee.

3:8 and thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, when ye are come to the brink of the water of
jordan, ye shall stand still in jordan.

3:9 and joshua said unto the children of israel, come hither, and hear
the words of the lord your god.

3:10 and joshua said, hereby ye shall know that the living god is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the hivites, and the perizzites, and
the girgashites, and the amorites, and the jebusites.

3:11 behold, the ark of the covenant of the lord of all the earth
passeth over before you into jordan.

3:12 now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of israel,
out of every tribe a man.

3:13 and it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of
the priests that bear the ark of the lord, the lord of all the earth,
shall rest in the waters of jordan, that the waters of jordan shall be
cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall
stand upon an heap.

3:14 and it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to
pass over jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant
before the people; 3:15 and as they that bare the ark were come unto
jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in
the brim of the water, (for jordan overfloweth all his banks all the
time of harvest,) 3:16 that the waters which came down from above
stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city adam, that is
beside zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed
over right against jericho.

3:17 and the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the lord
stood firm on dry ground in the midst of jordan, and all the
israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed
clean over jordan.

4:1 and it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over
jordan, that the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:2 take you twelve
men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 4:3 and command ye
them, saying, take you hence out of the midst of jordan, out of the
place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall
carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where
ye shall lodge this night.

4:4 then joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of israel, out of every tribe a man: 4:5 and joshua said unto
them, pass over before the ark of the lord your god into the midst of
jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder,
according unto the number of the tribes of the children of israel: 4:6
that this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, what mean ye by these stones?  4:7
then ye shall answer them, that the waters of jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the lord; when it passed over
jordan, the waters of jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be
for a memorial unto the children of israel for ever.

4:8 and the children of israel did so as joshua commanded, and took up
twelve stones out of the midst of jordan, as the lord spake unto
joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there.

4:9 and joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto this day.

4:10 for the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of jordan,
until everything was finished that the lord commanded joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that moses commanded joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over.

4:11 and it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
that the ark of the lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people.

4:12 and the children of reuben, and the children of gad, and half the
tribe of manasseh, passed over armed before the children of israel, as
moses spake unto them: 4:13 about forty thousand prepared for war
passed over before the lord unto battle, to the plains of jericho.

4:14 on that day the lord magnified joshua in the sight of all israel;
and they feared him, as they feared moses, all the days of his life.

4:15 and the lord spake unto joshua, saying, 4:16 command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of jordan.

4:17 joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, come ye up out of
jordan.

4:18 and it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the lord were come up out of the midst of jordan, and the
soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
waters of jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his
banks, as they did before.

4:19 and the people came up out of jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamped in gilgal, in the east border of jericho.

4:20 and those twelve stones, which they took out of jordan, did
joshua pitch in gilgal.

4:21 and he spake unto the children of israel, saying, when your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what mean
these stones?  4:22 then ye shall let your children know, saying,
israel came over this jordan on dry land.

4:23 for the lord your god dried up the waters of jordan from before
you, until ye were passed over, as the lord your god did to the red
sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 4:24
that all the people of the earth might know the hand of the lord, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the lord your god for ever.

5:1 and it came to pass, when all the kings of the amorites, which
were on the side of jordan westward, and all the kings of the
canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the lord had dried up
the waters of jordan from before the children of israel, until we were
passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them
any more, because of the children of israel.

5:2 at that time the lord said unto joshua, make thee sharp knives,
and circumcise again the children of israel the second time.

5:3 and joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
israel at the hill of the foreskins.

5:4 and this is the cause why joshua did circumcise: all the people
that came out of egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died
in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of egypt.

5:5 now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the
people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth
out of egypt, them they had not circumcised.

5:6 for the children of israel walked forty years in the wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war, which came out of egypt,
were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the lord: unto
whom the lord sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
lord sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that
floweth with milk and honey.

5:7 and their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them joshua
circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not
circumcised them by the way.

5:8 and it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the
people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were
whole.

5:9 and the lord said unto joshua, this day have i rolled away the
reproach of egypt from off you. wherefore the name of the place is
called gilgal unto this day.

5:10 and the children of israel encamped in gilgal, and kept the
passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of
jericho.

5:11 and they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after
the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.

5:12 and the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of israel manna any
more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of canaan that year.

5:13 and it came to pass, when joshua was by jericho, that he lifted
up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand: and joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, art thou for us, or for our adversaries?  5:14 and he
said, nay; but as captain of the host of the lord am i now come. and
joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto
him, what saith my lord unto his servant?  5:15 and the captain of the
lord's host said unto joshua, loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest is holy. and joshua did so.

6:1 now jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of
israel: none went out, and none came in.

6:2 and the lord said unto joshua, see, i have given into thine hand
jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.

6:3 and ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round
about the city once. thus shalt thou do six days.

6:4 and seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of
rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven
times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.

6:5 and it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with
the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall
fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight
before him.

6:6 and joshua the son of nun called the priests, and said unto them,
take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven
trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the lord.

6:7 and he said unto the people, pass on, and compass the city, and
let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the lord.

6:8 and it came to pass, when joshua had spoken unto the people, that
the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on
before the lord, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the
covenant of the lord followed them.

6:9 and the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on,
and blowing with the trumpets.

6:10 and joshua had commanded the people, saying, ye shall not shout,
nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out
of your mouth, until the day i bid you shout; then shall ye shout.

6:11 so the ark of the lord compassed the city, going about it once:
and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.

6:12 and joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
ark of the lord.

6:13 and seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before
the ark of the lord went on continually, and blew with the trumpets:
and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the
ark of the lord, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.

6:14 and the second day they compassed the city once, and returned
into the camp: so they did six days.

6:15 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early
about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same
manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven
times.

6:16 and it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew
with the trumpets, joshua said unto the people, shout; for the lord
hath given you the city.

6:17 and the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are
therein, to the lord: only rahab the harlot shall live, she and all
that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we
sent.

6:18 and ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest
ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and
make the camp of israel a curse, and trouble it.

6:19 but all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are
consecrated unto the lord: they shall come into the treasury of the
lord.

6:20 so the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets:
and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet,
and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down
flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight
before him, and they took the city.

6:21 and they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
sword.

6:22 but joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country, go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman,
and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.

6:23 and the young men that were spies went in, and brought out rahab,
and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she
had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the
camp of israel.

6:24 and they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only
the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they
put into the treasury of the house of the lord.

6:25 and joshua saved rahab the harlot alive, and her father's
household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in israel even unto
this day; because she hid the messengers, which joshua sent to spy out
jericho.

6:26 and joshua adjured them at that time, saying, cursed be the man
before the lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city jericho: he
shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
son shall he set up the gates of it.

6:27 so the lord was with joshua; and his fame was noised throughout
all the country.

7:1 but the children of israel committed a trespass in the accursed
thing: for achan, the son of carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of
zerah, of the tribe of judah, took of the accursed thing: and the
anger of the lord was kindled against the children of israel.

7:2 and joshua sent men from jericho to ai, which is beside bethaven,
on the east of bethel, and spake unto them, saying, go up and view the
country.

and the men went up and viewed ai.

7:3 and they returned to joshua, and said unto him, let not all the
people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but
few.

7:4 so there went up thither of the people about three thousand men:
and they fled before the men of ai.

7:5 and the men of ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
chased them from before the gate even unto shebarim, and smote them in
the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became
as water.

7:6 and joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
before the ark of the lord until the eventide, he and the elders of
israel, and put dust upon their heads.

7:7 and joshua said, alas, o lord god, wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
amorites, to destroy us? would to god we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side jordan!  7:8 o lord, what shall i say, when israel
turneth their backs before their enemies!  7:9 for the canaanites and
all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thy great name?  7:10 and the lord said unto joshua, get thee up;
wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?  7:11 israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgressed my covenant which i commanded them: for
they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.

7:12 therefore the children of israel could not stand before their
enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they
were accursed: neither will i be with you any more, except ye destroy
the accursed from among you.

7:13 up, sanctify the people, and say, sanctify yourselves against to
morrow: for thus saith the lord god of israel, there is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, o israel: thou canst not stand before
thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

7:14 in the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the lord taketh shall
come according to the families thereof; and the family which the lord
shall take shall come by households; and the household which the lord
shall take shall come man by man.

7:15 and it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath
transgressed the covenant of the lord, and because he hath wrought
folly in israel.

7:16 so joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of judah was taken: 7:17 and he brought
the family of judah; and he took the family of the zarhites: and he
brought the family of the zarhites man by man; and zabdi was taken:
7:18 and he brought his household man by man; and achan, the son of
carmi, the son of zabdi, the son of zerah, of the tribe of judah, was
taken.

7:19 and joshua said unto achan, my son, give, i pray thee, glory to
the lord god of israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me.

7:20 and achan answered joshua, and said, indeed i have sinned against
the lord god of israel, and thus and thus have i done: 7:21 when i saw
among the spoils a goodly babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then i coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it.

7:22 so joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and,
behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.

7:23 and they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
unto joshua, and unto all the children of israel, and laid them out
before the lord.

7:24 and joshua, and all israel with him, took achan the son of zerah,
and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons,
and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his
tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
achor.

7:25 and joshua said, why hast thou troubled us? the lord shall
trouble thee this day. and all israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.

7:26 and they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. so
the lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. wherefore the name
of that place was called, the valley of achor, unto this day.

8:1 and the lord said unto joshua, fear not, neither be thou dismayed:
take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to ai: see, i
have given into thy hand the king of ai, and his people, and his city,
and his land: 8:2 and thou shalt do to ai and her king as thou didst
unto jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it.

8:3 so joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against ai:
and joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent
them away by night.

8:4 and he commanded them, saying, behold, ye shall lie in wait
against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 and i, and all the people that are with me,
will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them, 8:6
(for they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
city; for they will say, they flee before us, as at the first:
therefore we will flee before them.

8:7 then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city:
for the lord your god will deliver it into your hand.

8:8 and it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
the city on fire: according to the commandment of the lord shall ye
do. see, i have commanded you.

8:9 joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abode between bethel and ai, on the west side of ai: but joshua
lodged that night among the people.

8:10 and joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
and went up, he and the elders of israel, before the people to ai.

8:11 and all the people, even the people of war that were with him,
went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the
north side of ai: now there was a valley between them and ai.

8:12 and he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in
ambush between bethel and ai, on the west side of the city.

8:13 and when they had set the people, even all the host that was on
the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the
city, joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.

8:14 and it came to pass, when the king of ai saw it, that they hasted
and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against israel to
battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain;
but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
city.

8:15 and joshua and all israel made as if they were beaten before
them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.

8:16 and all the people that were in ai were called together to pursue
after them: and they pursued after joshua, and were drawn away from
the city.

8:17 and there was not a man left in ai or bethel, that went not out
after israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after israel.

8:18 and the lord said unto joshua, stretch out the spear that is in
thy hand toward ai; for i will give it into thine hand. and joshua
stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.

8:19 and the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city,
and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.

8:20 and when the men of ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold,
the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to
flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness
turned back upon the pursuers.

8:21 and when joshua and all israel saw that the ambush had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,
and slew the men of ai.

8:22 and the other issued out of the city against them; so they were
in the midst of israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and
they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.

8:23 and the king of ai they took alive, and brought him to joshua.

8:24 and it came to pass, when israel had made an end of slaying all
the inhabitants of ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they
chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword,
until they were consumed, that all the israelites returned unto ai,
and smote it with the edge of the sword.

8:25 and so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and
women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of ai.

8:26 for joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the
spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of ai.

8:27 only the cattle and the spoil of that city israel took for a prey
unto themselves, according unto the word of the lord which he
commanded joshua.

8:28 and joshua burnt ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day.

8:29 and the king of ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day.

8:30 then joshua built an altar unto the lord god of israel in mount
ebal, 8:31 as moses the servant of the lord commanded the children of
israel, as it is written in the book of the law of moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offerings unto the lord, and sacrificed peace
offerings.

8:32 and he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of israel.

8:33 and all israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the
levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the lord, as well the
stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
mount gerizim, and half of them over against mount ebal; as moses the
servant of the lord had commanded before, that they should bless the
people of israel.

8:34 and afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.

8:35 there was not a word of all that moses commanded, which joshua
read not before all the congregation of israel, with the women, and
the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.

9:1 and it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side
jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the
great sea over against lebanon, the hittite, and the amorite, the
canaanite, the perizzite, the hivite, and the jebusite, heard thereof;
9:2 that they gathered themselves together, to fight with joshua and
with israel, with one accord.

9:3 and when the inhabitants of gibeon heard what joshua had done unto
jericho and to ai, 9:4 they did work wilily, and went and made as if
they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and
wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up; 9:5 and old shoes and
clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread
of their provision was dry and mouldy.

9:6 and they went to joshua unto the camp at gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of israel, we be come from a far country: now
therefore make ye a league with us.

9:7 and the men of israel said unto the hivites, peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you?  9:8 and they said
unto joshua, we are thy servants. and joshua said unto them, who are
ye? and from whence come ye?  9:9 and they said unto him, from a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the lord thy
god: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in egypt,
9:10 and all that he did to the two kings of the amorites, that were
beyond jordan, to sihon king of heshbon, and to og king of bashan,
which was at ashtaroth.

9:11 wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake
to us, saying, take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet
them, and say unto them, we are your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us.

9:12 this our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on
the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
it is mouldy: 9:13 and these bottles of wine, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes
are become old by reason of the very long journey.

9:14 and the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
mouth of the lord.

9:15 and joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to
let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.

9:16 and it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made
a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them.

9:17 and the children of israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. now their cities were gibeon, and chephirah, and
beeroth, and kirjathjearim.

9:18 and the children of israel smote them not, because the princes of
the congregation had sworn unto them by the lord god of israel. and
all the congregation murmured against the princes.

9:19 but all the princes said unto all the congregation, we have sworn
unto them by the lord god of israel: now therefore we may not touch
them.

9:20 this we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.

9:21 and the princes said unto them, let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
princes had promised them.

9:22 and joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, we are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us?  9:23 now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my god.

9:24 and they answered joshua, and said, because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the lord thy god commanded his servant moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing.

9:25 and now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do.

9:26 and so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of israel, that they slew them not.

9:27 and joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the congregation, and for the altar of the lord, even unto this
day, in the place which he should choose.

10:1 now it came to pass, when adonizedec king of jerusalem had heard
how joshua had taken ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done
to jericho and her king, so he had done to ai and her king; and how
the inhabitants of gibeon had made peace with israel, and were among
them; 10:2 that they feared greatly, because gibeon was a great city,
as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than ai, and
all the men thereof were mighty.

10:3 wherefore adonizedec king of jerusalem, sent unto hoham king of
hebron, and unto piram king of jarmuth, and unto japhia king of
lachish, and unto debir king of eglon, saying, 10:4 come up unto me,
and help me, that we may smite gibeon: for it hath made peace with
joshua and with the children of israel.

10:5 therefore the five kings of the amorites, the king of jerusalem,
the king of hebron, the king of jarmuth, the king of lachish, the king
of eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all
their hosts, and encamped before gibeon, and made war against it.

10:6 and the men of gibeon sent unto joshua to the camp to gilgal,
saying, slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly,
and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the amorites that dwell
in the mountains are gathered together against us.

10:7 so joshua ascended from gilgal, he, and all the people of war
with him, and all the mighty men of valour.

10:8 and the lord said unto joshua, fear them not: for i have
delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand
before thee.

10:9 joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from gilgal
all night.

10:10 and the lord discomfited them before israel, and slew them with
a great slaughter at gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth
up to bethhoron, and smote them to azekah, and unto makkedah.

10:11 and it came to pass, as they fled from before israel, and were
in the going down to bethhoron, that the lord cast down great stones
from heaven upon them unto azekah, and they died: they were more which
died with hailstones than they whom the children of israel slew with
the sword.

10:12 then spake joshua to the lord in the day when the lord delivered
up the amorites before the children of israel, and he said in the
sight of israel, sun, stand thou still upon gibeon; and thou, moon, in
the valley of ajalon.

10:13 and the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. is not this written in the
book of jasher? so the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day.

10:14 and there was no day like that before it or after it, that the
lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the lord fought for
israel.

10:15 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

10:16 but these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at
makkedah.

10:17 and it was told joshua, saying, the five kings are found hid in
a cave at makkedah.

10:18 and joshua said, roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 and stay ye not, but pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the lord your god hath delivered them
into your hand.

10:20 and it came to pass, when joshua and the children of israel had
made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they
were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced cities.

10:21 and all the people returned to the camp to joshua at makkedah in
peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of israel.

10:22 then said joshua, open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
those five kings unto me out of the cave.

10:23 and they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out
of the cave, the king of jerusalem, the king of hebron, the king of
jarmuth, the king of lachish, and the king of eglon.

10:24 and it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto
joshua, that joshua called for all the men of israel, and said unto
the captains of the men of war which went with him, come near, put
your feet upon the necks of these kings. and they came near, and put
their feet upon the necks of them.

10:25 and joshua said unto them, fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong
and of good courage: for thus shall the lord do to all your enemies
against whom ye fight.

10:26 and afterward joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them
on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.

10:27 and it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun,
that joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in
the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day.

10:28 and that day joshua took makkedah, and smote it with the edge of
the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all
the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the
king of makkedah as he did unto the king of jericho.

10:29 then joshua passed from makkedah, and all israel with him, unto
libnah, and fought against libnah: 10:30 and the lord delivered it
also, and the king thereof, into the hand of israel; and he smote it
with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he
let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto
the king of jericho.

10:31 and joshua passed from libnah, and all israel with him, unto
lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:32 and the
lord delivered lachish into the hand of israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein, according to all that he had done to libnah.

10:33 then horam king of gezer came up to help lachish; and joshua
smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.

10:34 and from lachish joshua passed unto eglon, and all israel with
him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:35 and
they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day,
according to all that he had done to lachish.

10:36 and joshua went up from eglon, and all israel with him, unto
hebron; and they fought against it: 10:37 and they took it, and smote
it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the
cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining, according to all that he had done to eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.

10:38 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, to debir; and
fought against it: 10:39 and he took it, and the king thereof, and all
the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to hebron, so he did to debir, and to the
king thereof; as he had done also to libnah, and to her king.

10:40 so joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the lord god of
israel commanded.

10:41 and joshua smote them from kadeshbarnea even unto gaza, and all
the country of goshen, even unto gibeon.

10:42 and all these kings and their land did joshua take at one time,
because the lord god of israel fought for israel.

10:43 and joshua returned, and all israel with him, unto the camp to
gilgal.

11:1 and it came to pass, when jabin king of hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to jobab king of madon, and to the king of
shimron, and to the king of achshaph, 11:2 and to the kings that were
on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the borders of dor on the west, 11:3 and to
the canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the amorite, and the
hittite, and the perizzite, and the jebusite in the mountains, and to
the hivite under hermon in the land of mizpeh.

11:4 and they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much
people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with
horses and chariots very many.

11:5 and when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched
together at the waters of merom, to fight against israel.

11:6 and the lord said unto joshua, be not afraid because of them: for
to morrow about this time will i deliver them up all slain before
israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with
fire.

11:7 so joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them
by the waters of merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.

11:8 and the lord delivered them into the hand of israel, who smote
them, and chased them unto great zidon, and unto misrephothmaim, and
unto the valley of mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they
left them none remaining.

11:9 and joshua did unto them as the lord bade him: he houghed their
horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.

11:10 and joshua at that time turned back, and took hazor, and smote
the king thereof with the sword: for hazor beforetime was the head of
all those kingdoms.

11:11 and they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of
the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe:
and he burnt hazor with fire.

11:12 and all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them,
did joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he
utterly destroyed them, as moses the servant of the lord commanded.

11:13 but as for the cities that stood still in their strength, israel
burned none of them, save hazor only; that did joshua burn.

11:14 and all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote
with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither
left they any to breathe.

11:15 as the lord commanded moses his servant, so did moses command
joshua, and so did joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the lord
commanded moses.

11:16 so joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 even
from the mount halak, that goeth up to seir, even unto baalgad in the
valley of lebanon under mount hermon: and all their kings he took, and
smote them, and slew them.

11:18 joshua made war a long time with all those kings.

11:19 there was not a city that made peace with the children of
israel, save the hivites the inhabitants of gibeon: all other they
took in battle.

11:20 for it was of the lord to harden their hearts, that they should
come against israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
lord commanded moses.

11:21 and at that time came joshua, and cut off the anakims from the
mountains, from hebron, from debir, from anab, and from all the
mountains of judah, and from all the mountains of israel: joshua
destroyed them utterly with their cities.

11:22 there was none of the anakims left in the land of the children
of israel: only in gaza, in gath, and in ashdod, there remained.

11:23 so joshua took the whole land, according to all that the lord
said unto moses; and joshua gave it for an inheritance unto israel
according to their divisions by their tribes. and the land rested from
war.

12:1 now these are the kings of the land, which the children of israel
smote, and possessed their land on the other side jordan toward the
rising of the sun, from the river arnon unto mount hermon, and all the
plain on the east: 12:2 sihon king of the amorites, who dwelt in
heshbon, and ruled from aroer, which is upon the bank of the river
arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half gilead, even
unto the river jabbok, which is the border of the children of ammon;
12:3 and from the plain to the sea of chinneroth on the east, and unto
the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under ashdothpisgah: 12:4 and the
coast of og king of bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants,
that dwelt at ashtaroth and at edrei, 12:5 and reigned in mount
hermon, and in salcah, and in all bashan, unto the border of the
geshurites and the maachathites, and half gilead, the border of sihon
king of heshbon.

12:6 them did moses the servant of the lord and the children of israel
smite: and moses the servant of the lord gave it for a possession unto
the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half tribe of manasseh.

12:7 and these are the kings of the country which joshua and the
children of israel smote on this side jordan on the west, from baalgad
in the valley of lebanon even unto the mount halak, that goeth up to
seir; which joshua gave unto the tribes of israel for a possession
according to their divisions; 12:8 in the mountains, and in the
valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness,
and in the south country; the hittites, the amorites, and the
canaanites, the perizzites, the hivites, and the jebusites: 12:9 the
king of jericho, one; the king of ai, which is beside bethel, one;
12:10 the king of jerusalem, one; the king of hebron, one; 12:11 the
king of jarmuth, one; the king of lachish, one; 12:12 the king of
eglon, one; the king of gezer, one; 12:13 the king of debir, one; the
king of geder, one; 12:14 the king of hormah, one; the king of arad,
one; 12:15 the king of libnah, one; the king of adullam, one; 12:16
the king of makkedah, one; the king of bethel, one; 12:17 the king of
tappuah, one; the king of hepher, one; 12:18 the king of aphek, one;
the king of lasharon, one; 12:19 the king of madon, one; the king of
hazor, one; 12:20 the king of shimronmeron, one; the king of achshaph,
one; 12:21 the king of taanach, one; the king of megiddo, one; 12:22
the king of kedesh, one; the king of jokneam of carmel, one; 12:23 the
king of dor in the coast of dor, one; the king of the nations of
gilgal, one; 12:24 the king of tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and
one.

13:1 now joshua was old and stricken in years; and the lord said unto
him, thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very
much land to be possessed.

13:2 this is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the
philistines, and all geshuri, 13:3 from sihor, which is before egypt,
even unto the borders of ekron northward, which is counted to the
canaanite: five lords of the philistines; the gazathites, and the
ashdothites, the eshkalonites, the gittites, and the ekronites; also
the avites: 13:4 from the south, all the land of the canaanites, and
mearah that is beside the sidonians unto aphek, to the borders of the
amorites: 13:5 and the land of the giblites, and all lebanon, toward
the sunrising, from baalgad under mount hermon unto the entering into
hamath.

13:6 all the inhabitants of the hill country from lebanon unto
misrephothmaim, and all the sidonians, them will i drive out from
before the children of israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the
israelites for an inheritance, as i have commanded thee.

13:7 now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine
tribes, and the half tribe of manasseh, 13:8 with whom the reubenites
and the gadites have received their inheritance, which moses gave
them, beyond jordan eastward, even as moses the servant of the lord
gave them; 13:9 from aroer, that is upon the bank of the river arnon,
and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of
medeba unto dibon; 13:10 and all the cities of sihon king of the
amorites, which reigned in heshbon, unto the border of the children of
ammon; 13:11 and gilead, and the border of the geshurites and
maachathites, and all mount hermon, and all bashan unto salcah; 13:12
all the kingdom of og in bashan, which reigned in ashtaroth and in
edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did moses
smite, and cast them out.

13:13 nevertheless the children of israel expelled not the geshurites,
nor the maachathites: but the geshurites and the maachathites dwell
among the israelites until this day.

13:14 only unto the tribes of levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the lord god of israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

13:15 and moses gave unto the tribe of the children of reuben
inheritance according to their families.

13:16 and their coast was from aroer, that is on the bank of the river
arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by medeba; 13:17 heshbon, and all her cities that are in the
plain; dibon, and bamothbaal, and bethbaalmeon, 13:18 and jahaza, and
kedemoth, and mephaath, 13:19 and kirjathaim, and sibmah, and
zarethshahar in the mount of the valley, 13:20 and bethpeor, and
ashdothpisgah, and bethjeshimoth, 13:21 and all the cities of the
plain, and all the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites, which
reigned in heshbon, whom moses smote with the princes of midian, evi,
and rekem, and zur, and hur, and reba, which were dukes of sihon,
dwelling in the country.

13:22 balaam also the son of beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.

13:23 and the border of the children of reuben was jordan, and the
border thereof. this was the inheritance of the children of reuben
after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.

13:24 and moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of gad, even unto the
children of gad according to their families.

13:25 and their coast was jazer, and all the cities of gilead, and
half the land of the children of ammon, unto aroer that is before
rabbah; 13:26 and from heshbon unto ramathmizpeh, and betonim; and
from mahanaim unto the border of debir; 13:27 and in the valley,
betharam, and bethnimrah, and succoth, and zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of sihon king of heshbon, jordan and his border, even unto the
edge of the sea of chinnereth on the other side jordan eastward.

13:28 this is the inheritance of the children of gad after their
families, the cities, and their villages.

13:29 and moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of manasseh: and
this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of manasseh
by their families.

13:30 and their coast was from mahanaim, all bashan, all the kingdom
of og king of bashan, and all the towns of jair, which are in bashan,
threescore cities: 13:31 and half gilead, and ashtaroth, and edrei,
cities of the kingdom of og in bashan, were pertaining unto the
children of machir the son of manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of machir by their families.

13:32 these are the countries which moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of moab, on the other side jordan, by
jericho, eastward.

13:33 but unto the tribe of levi moses gave not any inheritance: the
lord god of israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.

14:1 and these are the countries which the children of israel
inherited in the land of canaan, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, distributed for inheritance to them.

14:2 by lot was their inheritance, as the lord commanded by the hand
of moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.

14:3 for moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side jordan: but unto the levites he gave none
inheritance among them.

14:4 for the children of joseph were two tribes, manasseh and ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance.

14:5 as the lord commanded moses, so the children of israel did, and
they divided the land.

14:6 then the children of judah came unto joshua in gilgal: and caleb
the son of jephunneh the kenezite said unto him, thou knowest the
thing that the lord said unto moses the man of god concerning me and
thee in kadeshbarnea.

14:7 forty years old was i when moses the servant of the lord sent me
from kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and i brought him word again
as it was in mine heart.

14:8 nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but i wholly followed the lord my god.

14:9 and moses sware on that day, saying, surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for
ever, because thou hast wholly followed the lord my god.

14:10 and now, behold, the lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, even since the lord spake this word unto moses,
while the children of israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo,
i am this day fourscore and five years old.

14:11 as yet i am as strong this day as i was in the day that moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in.

14:12 now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the lord spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the lord will be
with me, then i shall be able to drive them out, as the lord said.

14:13 and joshua blessed him, and gave unto caleb the son of jephunneh
hebron for an inheritance.

14:14 hebron therefore became the inheritance of caleb the son of
jephunneh the kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the lord god of israel.

14:15 and the name of hebron before was kirjatharba; which arba was a
great man among the anakims. and the land had rest from war.

15:1 this then was the lot of the tribe of the children of judah by
their families; even to the border of edom the wilderness of zin
southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.

15:2 and their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from
the bay that looketh southward: 15:3 and it went out to the south side
to maalehacrabbim, and passed along to zin, and ascended up on the
south side unto kadeshbarnea, and passed along to hezron, and went up
to adar, and fetched a compass to karkaa: 15:4 from thence it passed
toward azmon, and went out unto the river of egypt; and the goings out
of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.

15:5 and the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of
jordan.

and their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at
the uttermost part of jordan: 15:6 and the border went up to
bethhogla, and passed along by the north of betharabah; and the border
went up to the stone of bohan the son of reuben: 15:7 and the border
went up toward debir from the valley of achor, and so northward,
looking toward gilgal, that is before the going up to adummim, which
is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the
waters of enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at enrogel: 15:8
and the border went up by the valley of the son of hinnom unto the
south side of the jebusite; the same is jerusalem: and the border went
up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of hinnom
westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:
15:9 and the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the
fountain of the water of nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount
ephron; and the border was drawn to baalah, which is kirjathjearim:
15:10 and the border compassed from baalah westward unto mount seir,
and passed along unto the side of mount jearim, which is chesalon, on
the north side, and went down to bethshemesh, and passed on to timnah:
15:11 and the border went out unto the side of ekron northward: and
the border was drawn to shicron, and passed along to mount baalah, and
went out unto jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the
sea.

15:12 and the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof.

this is the coast of the children of judah round about according to
their families.

15:13 and unto caleb the son of jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of judah, according to the commandment of the lord to joshua,
even the city of arba the father of anak, which city is hebron.

15:14 and caleb drove thence the three sons of anak, sheshai, and
ahiman, and talmai, the children of anak.

15:15 and he went up thence to the inhabitants of debir: and the name
of debir before was kirjathsepher.

15:16 and caleb said, he that smiteth kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to
him will i give achsah my daughter to wife.

15:17 and othniel the son of kenaz, the brother of caleb, took it: and
he gave him achsah his daughter to wife.

15:18 and it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and caleb said
unto her, what wouldest thou?  15:19 who answered, give me a blessing;
for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water.
and he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.

15:20 this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of judah
according to their families.

15:21 and the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of judah
toward the coast of edom southward were kabzeel, and eder, and jagur,
15:22 and kinah, and dimonah, and adadah, 15:23 and kedesh, and hazor,
and ithnan, 15:24 ziph, and telem, and bealoth, 15:25 and hazor,
hadattah, and kerioth, and hezron, which is hazor, 15:26 amam, and
shema, and moladah, 15:27 and hazargaddah, and heshmon, and bethpalet,
15:28 and hazarshual, and beersheba, and bizjothjah, 15:29 baalah, and
iim, and azem, 15:30 and eltolad, and chesil, and hormah, 15:31 and
ziklag, and madmannah, and sansannah, 15:32 and lebaoth, and shilhim,
and ain, and rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their
villages: 15:33 and in the valley, eshtaol, and zoreah, and ashnah,
15:34 and zanoah, and engannim, tappuah, and enam, 15:35 jarmuth, and
adullam, socoh, and azekah, 15:36 and sharaim, and adithaim, and
gederah, and gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages: 15:37
zenan, and hadashah, and migdalgad, 15:38 and dilean, and mizpeh, and
joktheel, 15:39 lachish, and bozkath, and eglon, 15:40 and cabbon, and
lahmam, and kithlish, 15:41 and gederoth, bethdagon, and naamah, and
makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages: 15:42 libnah, and ether,
and ashan, 15:43 and jiphtah, and ashnah, and nezib, 15:44 and keilah,
and achzib, and mareshah; nine cities with their villages: 15:45
ekron, with her towns and her villages: 15:46 from ekron even unto the
sea, all that lay near ashdod, with their villages: 15:47 ashdod with
her towns and her villages, gaza with her towns and her villages, unto
the river of egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof: 15:48
and in the mountains, shamir, and jattir, and socoh, 15:49 and dannah,
and kirjathsannah, which is debir, 15:50 and anab, and eshtemoh, and
anim, 15:51 and goshen, and holon, and giloh; eleven cities with their
villages: 15:52 arab, and dumah, and eshean, 15:53 and janum, and
bethtappuah, and aphekah, 15:54 and humtah, and kirjatharba, which is
hebron, and zior; nine cities with their villages: 15:55 maon, carmel,
and ziph, and juttah, 15:56 and jezreel, and jokdeam, and zanoah,
15:57 cain, gibeah, and timnah; ten cities with their villages: 15:58
halhul, bethzur, and gedor, 15:59 and maarath, and bethanoth, and
eltekon; six cities with their villages: 15:60 kirjathbaal, which is
kirjathjearim, and rabbah; two cities with their villages: 15:61 in
the wilderness, betharabah, middin, and secacah, 15:62 and nibshan,
and the city of salt, and engedi; six cities with their villages.

15:63 as for the jebusites the inhabitants of jerusalem, the children
of judah could not drive them out; but the jebusites dwell with the
children of judah at jerusalem unto this day.

16:1 and the lot of the children of joseph fell from jordan by
jericho, unto the water of jericho on the east, to the wilderness that
goeth up from jericho throughout mount bethel, 16:2 and goeth out from
bethel to luz, and passeth along unto the borders of archi to ataroth,
16:3 and goeth down westward to the coast of japhleti, unto the coast
of bethhoron the nether, and to gezer; and the goings out thereof are
at the sea.

16:4 so the children of joseph, manasseh and ephraim, took their
inheritance.

16:5 and the border of the children of ephraim according to their
families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east
side was atarothaddar, unto bethhoron the upper; 16:6 and the border
went out toward the sea to michmethah on the north side; and the
border went about eastward unto taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the
east to janohah; 16:7 and it went down from janohah to ataroth, and to
naarath, and came to jericho, and went out at jordan.

16:8 the border went out from tappuah westward unto the river kanah;
and the goings out thereof were at the sea. this is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of ephraim by their families.

16:9 and the separate cities for the children of ephraim were among
the inheritance of the children of manasseh, all the cities with their
villages.

16:10 and they drave not out the canaanites that dwelt in gezer: but
the canaanites dwell among the ephraimites unto this day, and serve
under tribute.

17:1 there was also a lot for the tribe of manasseh; for he was the
firstborn of joseph; to wit, for machir the firstborn of manasseh, the
father of gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had gilead
and bashan.

17:2 there was also a lot for the rest of the children of manasseh by
their families; for the children of abiezer, and for the children of
helek, and for the children of asriel, and for the children of
shechem, and for the children of hepher, and for the children of
shemida: these were the male children of manasseh the son of joseph by
their families.

17:3 but zelophehad, the son of hepher, the son of gilead, the son of
machir, the son of manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, mahlah, and noah, hoglah, milcah, and
tirzah.

17:4 and they came near before eleazar the priest, and before joshua
the son of nun, and before the princes, saying, the lord commanded
moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. therefore
according to the commandment of the lord he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father.

17:5 and there fell ten portions to manasseh, beside the land of
gilead and bashan, which were on the other side jordan; 17:6 because
the daughters of manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the
rest of manasseh's sons had the land of gilead.

17:7 and the coast of manasseh was from asher to michmethah, that
lieth before shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto
the inhabitants of entappuah.

17:8 now manasseh had the land of tappuah: but tappuah on the border
of manasseh belonged to the children of ephraim; 17:9 and the coast
descended unto the river kanah, southward of the river: these cities
of ephraim are among the cities of manasseh: the coast of manasseh
also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were
at the sea: 17:10 southward it was ephraim's, and northward it was
manasseh's, and the sea is his border; and they met together in asher
on the north, and in issachar on the east.

17:11 and manasseh had in issachar and in asher bethshean and her
towns, and ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of dor and her
towns, and the inhabitants of endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of megiddo and her
towns, even three countries.

17:12 yet the children of manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the canaanites would dwell in that land.

17:13 yet it came to pass, when the children of israel were waxen
strong, that they put the canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly
drive them out.

17:14 and the children of joseph spake unto joshua, saying, why hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing i am a
great people, forasmuch as the lord hath blessed me hitherto?  17:15
and joshua answered them, if thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
perizzites and of the giants, if mount ephraim be too narrow for thee.

17:16 and the children of joseph said, the hill is not enough for us:
and all the canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of jezreel.

17:17 and joshua spake unto the house of joseph, even to ephraim and
to manasseh, saying, thou art a great people, and hast great power:
thou shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 but the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.

18:1 and the whole congregation of the children of israel assembled
together at shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation
there. and the land was subdued before them.

18:2 and there remained among the children of israel seven tribes,
which had not yet received their inheritance.

18:3 and joshua said unto the children of israel, how long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the lord god of your fathers
hath given you?  18:4 give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and i will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me.

18:5 and they shall divide it into seven parts: judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north.

18:6 ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that i may cast lots for you here before
the lord our god.

18:7 but the levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
lord is their inheritance: and gad, and reuben, and half the tribe of
manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond jordan on the east,
which moses the servant of the lord gave them.

18:8 and the men arose, and went away: and joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that i may here cast lots for you
before the lord in shiloh.

18:9 and the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to joshua to the
host at shiloh.

18:10 and joshua cast lots for them in shiloh before the lord: and
there joshua divided the land unto the children of israel according to
their divisions.

18:11 and the lot of the tribe of the children of benjamin came up
according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
between the children of judah and the children of joseph.

18:12 and their border on the north side was from jordan; and the
border went up to the side of jericho on the north side, and went up
through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the
wilderness of bethaven.

18:13 and the border went over from thence toward luz, to the side of
luz, which is bethel, southward; and the border descended to
atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether
bethhoron.

18:14 and the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the
sea southward, from the hill that lieth before bethhoron southward;
and the goings out thereof were at kirjathbaal, which is
kirjathjearim, a city of the children of judah: this was the west
quarter.

18:15 and the south quarter was from the end of kirjathjearim, and the
border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of
nephtoah: 18:16 and the border came down to the end of the mountain
that lieth before the valley of the son of hinnom, and which is in the
valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of
hinnom, to the side of jebusi on the south, and descended to enrogel,
18:17 and was drawn from the north, and went forth to enshemesh, and
went forth toward geliloth, which is over against the going up of
adummim, and descended to the stone of bohan the son of reuben, 18:18
and passed along toward the side over against arabah northward, and
went down unto arabah: 18:19 and the border passed along to the side
of bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the
north bay of the salt sea at the south end of jordan: this was the
south coast.

18:20 and jordan was the border of it on the east side. this was the
inheritance of the children of benjamin, by the coasts thereof round
about, according to their families.

18:21 now the cities of the tribe of the children of benjamin
according to their families were jericho, and bethhoglah, and the
valley of keziz, 18:22 and betharabah, and zemaraim, and bethel, 18:23
and avim, and pharah, and ophrah, 18:24 and chepharhaammonai, and
ophni, and gaba; twelve cities with their villages: 18:25 gibeon, and
ramah, and beeroth, 18:26 and mizpeh, and chephirah, and mozah, 18:27
and rekem, and irpeel, and taralah, 18:28 and zelah, eleph, and
jebusi, which is jerusalem, gibeath, and kirjath; fourteen cities with
their villages. this is the inheritance of the children of benjamin
according to their families.

19:1 and the second lot came forth to simeon, even for the tribe of
the children of simeon according to their families: and their
inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of judah.

19:2 and they had in their inheritance beersheba, and sheba, and
moladah, 19:3 and hazarshual, and balah, and azem, 19:4 and eltolad,
and bethul, and hormah, 19:5 and ziklag, and bethmarcaboth, and
hazarsusah, 19:6 and bethlebaoth, and sharuhen; thirteen cities and
their villages: 19:7 ain, remmon, and ether, and ashan; four cities
and their villages: 19:8 and all the villages that were round about
these cities to baalathbeer, ramath of the south. this is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of simeon according to their
families.

19:9 out of the portion of the children of judah was the inheritance
of the children of simeon: for the part of the children of judah was
too much for them: therefore the children of simeon had their
inheritance within the inheritance of them.

19:10 and the third lot came up for the children of zebulun according
to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto sarid:
19:11 and their border went up toward the sea, and maralah, and
reached to dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before
jokneam; 19:12 and turned from sarid eastward toward the sunrising
unto the border of chislothtabor, and then goeth out to daberath, and
goeth up to japhia, 19:13 and from thence passeth on along on the east
to gittahhepher, to ittahkazin, and goeth out to remmonmethoar to
neah; 19:14 and the border compasseth it on the north side to
hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of jiphthahel:
19:15 and kattath, and nahallal, and shimron, and idalah, and
bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages.

19:16 this is the inheritance of the children of zebulun according to
their families, these cities with their villages.

19:17 and the fourth lot came out to issachar, for the children of
issachar according to their families.

19:18 and their border was toward jezreel, and chesulloth, and shunem,
19:19 and haphraim, and shihon, and anaharath, 19:20 and rabbith, and
kishion, and abez, 19:21 and remeth, and engannim, and enhaddah, and
bethpazzez; 19:22 and the coast reacheth to tabor, and shahazimah, and
bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at jordan: sixteen
cities with their villages.

19:23 this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of issachar
according to their families, the cities and their villages.

19:24 and the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of
asher according to their families.

19:25 and their border was helkath, and hali, and beten, and achshaph,
19:26 and alammelech, and amad, and misheal; and reacheth to carmel
westward, and to shihorlibnath; 19:27 and turneth toward the sunrising
to bethdagon, and reacheth to zebulun, and to the valley of jiphthahel
toward the north side of bethemek, and neiel, and goeth out to cabul
on the left hand, 19:28 and hebron, and rehob, and hammon, and kanah,
even unto great zidon; 19:29 and then the coast turneth to ramah, and
to the strong city tyre; and the coast turneth to hosah; and the
outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to achzib: 19:30 ummah
also, and aphek, and rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.

19:31 this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of asher
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:32 the sixth lot came out to the children of naphtali, even for the
children of naphtali according to their families.

19:33 and their coast was from heleph, from allon to zaanannim, and
adami, nekeb, and jabneel, unto lakum; and the outgoings thereof were
at jordan: 19:34 and then the coast turneth westward to aznothtabor,
and goeth out from thence to hukkok, and reacheth to zebulun on the
south side, and reacheth to asher on the west side, and to judah upon
jordan toward the sunrising.

19:35 and the fenced cities are ziddim, zer, and hammath, rakkath, and
chinnereth, 19:36 and adamah, and ramah, and hazor, 19:37 and kedesh,
and edrei, and enhazor, 19:38 and iron, and migdalel, horem, and
bethanath, and bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.

19:39 this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of naphtali
according to their families, the cities and their villages.

19:40 and the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of
dan according to their families.

19:41 and the coast of their inheritance was zorah, and eshtaol, and
irshemesh, 19:42 and shaalabbin, and ajalon, and jethlah, 19:43 and
elon, and thimnathah, and ekron, 19:44 and eltekeh, and gibbethon, and
baalath, 19:45 and jehud, and beneberak, and gathrimmon, 19:46 and
mejarkon, and rakkon, with the border before japho.

19:47 and the coast of the children of dan went out too little for
them: therefore the children of dan went up to fight against leshem,
and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called leshem, dan, after the name of dan
their father.

19:48 this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of dan
according to their families, these cities with their villages.

19:49 when they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance
by their coasts, the children of israel gave an inheritance to joshua
the son of nun among them: 19:50 according to the word of the lord
they gave him the city which he asked, even timnathserah in mount
ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.

19:51 these are the inheritances, which eleazar the priest, and joshua
the son of nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in shiloh before
the lord, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. so they
made an end of dividing the country.

20:1 the lord also spake unto joshua, saying, 20:2 speak to the
children of israel, saying, appoint out for you cities of refuge,
whereof i spake unto you by the hand of moses: 20:3 that the slayer
that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.

20:4 and when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand
at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause
in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the
city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.

20:5 and if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not
deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour
unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.

20:6 and he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the
congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that
shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto
his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he
fled.

20:7 and they appointed kedesh in galilee in mount naphtali, and
shechem in mount ephraim, and kirjatharba, which is hebron, in the
mountain of judah.

20:8 and on the other side jordan by jericho eastward, they assigned
bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of reuben, and
ramoth in gilead out of the tribe of gad, and golan in bashan out of
the tribe of manasseh.

20:9 these were the cities appointed for all the children of israel,
and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.

21:1 then came near the heads of the fathers of the levites unto
eleazar the priest, and unto joshua the son of nun, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of israel; 21:2 and they
spake unto them at shiloh in the land of canaan, saying, the lord
commanded by the hand of moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle.

21:3 and the children of israel gave unto the levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the lord, these cities and their
suburbs.

21:4 and the lot came out for the families of the kohathites: and the
children of aaron the priest, which were of the levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of judah, and out of the tribe of simeon, and out of
the tribe of benjamin, thirteen cities.

21:5 and the rest of the children of kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of ephraim, and out of the tribe of dan, and out
of the half tribe of manasseh, ten cities.

21:6 and the children of gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of issachar, and out of the tribe of asher, and out of the tribe
of naphtali, and out of the half tribe of manasseh in bashan, thirteen
cities.

21:7 the children of merari by their families had out of the tribe of
reuben, and out of the tribe of gad, and out of the tribe of zebulun,
twelve cities.

21:8 and the children of israel gave by lot unto the levites these
cities with their suburbs, as the lord commanded by the hand of moses.

21:9 and they gave out of the tribe of the children of judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name.

21:10 which the children of aaron, being of the families of the
kohathites, who were of the children of levi, had: for theirs was the
first lot.

21:11 and they gave them the city of arba the father of anak, which
city is hebron, in the hill country of judah, with the suburbs thereof
round about it.

21:12 but the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they
to caleb the son of jephunneh for his possession.

21:13 thus they gave to the children of aaron the priest hebron with
her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and libnah with
her suburbs, 21:14 and jattir with her suburbs, and eshtemoa with her
suburbs, 21:15 and holon with her suburbs, and debir with her suburbs,
21:16 and ain with her suburbs, and juttah with her suburbs, and
bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.

21:17 and out of the tribe of benjamin, gibeon with her suburbs, geba
with her suburbs, 21:18 anathoth with her suburbs, and almon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:19 all the cities of the children of aaron, the priests, were
thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:20 and the families of the children of kohath, the levites which
remained of the children of kohath, even they had the cities of their
lot out of the tribe of ephraim.

21:21 for they gave them shechem with her suburbs in mount ephraim, to
be a city of refuge for the slayer; and gezer with her suburbs, 21:22
and kibzaim with her suburbs, and bethhoron with her suburbs; four
cities.

21:23 and out of the tribe of dan, eltekeh with her suburbs, gibbethon
with her suburbs, 21:24 aijalon with her suburbs, gathrimmon with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:25 and out of the half tribe of manasseh, tanach with her suburbs,
and gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities.

21:26 all the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of
the children of kohath that remained.

21:27 and unto the children of gershon, of the families of the
levites, out of the other half tribe of manasseh they gave golan in
bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and
beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.

21:28 and out of the tribe of issachar, kishon with her suburbs,
dabareh with her suburbs, 21:29 jarmuth with her suburbs, engannim
with her suburbs; four cities.

21:30 and out of the tribe of asher, mishal with her suburbs, abdon
with her suburbs, 21:31 helkath with her suburbs, and rehob with her
suburbs; four cities.

21:32 and out of the tribe of naphtali, kedesh in galilee with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and hammothdor with
her suburbs, and kartan with her suburbs; three cities.

21:33 all the cities of the gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs.

21:34 and unto the families of the children of merari, the rest of the
levites, out of the tribe of zebulun, jokneam with her suburbs, and
kartah with her suburbs, 21:35 dimnah with her suburbs, nahalal with
her suburbs; four cities.

21:36 and out of the tribe of reuben, bezer with her suburbs, and
jahazah with her suburbs, 21:37 kedemoth with her suburbs, and
mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.

21:38 and out of the tribe of gad, ramoth in gilead with her suburbs,
to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and mahanaim with her suburbs,
21:39 heshbon with her suburbs, jazer with her suburbs; four cities in
all.

21:40 so all the cities for the children of merari by their families,
which were remaining of the families of the levites, were by their lot
twelve cities.

21:41 all the cities of the levites within the possession of the
children of israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.

21:42 these cities were every one with their suburbs round about them:
thus were all these cities.

21:43 and the lord gave unto israel all the land which he sware to
give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.

21:44 and the lord gave them rest round about, according to all that
he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them; the lord delivered all their enemies into their
hand.

21:45 there failed not ought of any good thing which the lord had
spoken unto the house of israel; all came to pass.

22:1 then joshua called the reubenites, and the gadites, and the half
tribe of manasseh, 22:2 and said unto them, ye have kept all that
moses the servant of the lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that i commanded you: 22:3 ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the lord your god.

22:4 and now the lord your god hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which moses the servant
of the lord gave you on the other side jordan.

22:5 but take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
moses the servant of the lord charged you, to love the lord your god,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul.

22:6 so joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents.

22:7 now to the one half of the tribe of manasseh moses had given
possession in bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave joshua
among their brethren on this side jordan westward. and when joshua
sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them, 22:8 and
he spake unto them, saying, return with much riches unto your tents,
and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren.

22:9 and the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half
tribe of manasseh returned, and departed from the children of israel
out of shiloh, which is in the land of canaan, to go unto the country
of gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, according to the word of the lord by the hand of moses.

22:10 and when they came unto the borders of jordan, that are in the
land of canaan, the children of reuben and the children of gad and the
half tribe of manasseh built there an altar by jordan, a great altar
to see to.

22:11 and the children of israel heard say, behold, the children of
reuben and the children of gad and the half tribe of manasseh have
built an altar over against the land of canaan, in the borders of
jordan, at the passage of the children of israel.

22:12 and when the children of israel heard of it, the whole
congregation of the children of israel gathered themselves together at
shiloh, to go up to war against them.

22:13 and the children of israel sent unto the children of reuben, and
to the children of gad, and to the half tribe of manasseh, into the
land of gilead, phinehas the son of eleazar the priest, 22:14 and with
him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the
tribes of israel; and each one was an head of the house of their
fathers among the thousands of israel.

22:15 and they came unto the children of reuben, and to the children
of gad, and to the half tribe of manasseh, unto the land of gilead,
and they spake with them, saying, 22:16 thus saith the whole
congregation of the lord, what trespass is this that ye have committed
against the god of israel, to turn away this day from following the
lord, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this
day against the lord?  22:17 is the iniquity of peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was
a plague in the congregation of the lord, 22:18 but that ye must turn
away this day from following the lord? and it will be, seeing ye rebel
to day against the lord, that to morrow he will be wroth with the
whole congregation of israel.

22:19 notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the lord, wherein the
lord's tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel
not against the lord, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar
beside the altar of the lord our god.

22:20 did not achan the son of zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of israel? and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity.

22:21 then the children of reuben and the children of gad and the half
tribe of manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands
of israel, 22:22 the lord god of gods, the lord god of gods, he
knoweth, and israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the lord, (save us not this day,) 22:23 that we
have built us an altar to turn from following the lord, or if to offer
thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace
offerings thereon, let the lord himself require it; 22:24 and if we
have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, in time to
come your children might speak unto our children, saying, what have ye
to do with the lord god of israel?  22:25 for the lord hath made
jordan a border between us and you, ye children of reuben and children
of gad; ye have no part in the lord: so shall your children make our
children cease from fearing the lord.

22:26 therefore we said, let us now prepare to build us an altar, not
for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice: 22:27 but that it may be a
witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we
might do the service of the lord before him with our burnt offerings,
and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your
children may not say to our children in time to come, ye have no part
in the lord.

22:28 therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to
us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again,
behold the pattern of the altar of the lord, which our fathers made,
not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness
between us and you.

22:29 god forbid that we should rebel against the lord, and turn this
day from following the lord, to build an altar for burnt offerings,
for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the lord
our god that is before his tabernacle.

22:30 and when phinehas the priest, and the princes of the
congregation and heads of the thousands of israel which were with him,
heard the words that the children of reuben and the children of gad
and the children of manasseh spake, it pleased them.

22:31 and phinehas the son of eleazar the priest said unto the
children of reuben, and to the children of gad, and to the children of
manasseh, this day we perceive that the lord is among us, because ye
have not committed this trespass against the lord: now ye have
delivered the children of israel out of the hand of the lord.

22:32 and phinehas the son of eleazar the priest, and the princes,
returned from the children of reuben, and from the children of gad,
out of the land of gilead, unto the land of canaan, to the children of
israel, and brought them word again.

22:33 and the thing pleased the children of israel; and the children
of israel blessed god, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of reuben and gad
dwelt.

22:34 and the children of reuben and the children of gad called the
altar ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the lord is god.

23:1 and it came to pass a long time after that the lord had given
rest unto israel from all their enemies round about, that joshua waxed
old and stricken in age.

23:2 and joshua called for all israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, i am old and stricken in age: 23:3 and ye have seen all
that the lord your god hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the lord your god is he that hath fought for you.

23:4 behold, i have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from jordan, with all the
nations that i have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.

23:5 and the lord your god, he shall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
the lord your god hath promised unto you.

23:6 be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 that ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve
them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 23:8 but cleave unto the lord your
god, as ye have done unto this day.

23:9 for the lord hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
this day.

23:10 one man of you shall chase a thousand: for the lord your god, he
it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.

23:11 take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the lord
your god.

23:12 else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant
of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 23:13 know
for a certainty that the lord your god will no more drive out any of
these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto
you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye
perish from off this good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23:14 and, behold, this day i am going the way of all the earth: and
ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing
hath failed of all the good things which the lord your god spake
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
failed thereof.

23:15 therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are
come upon you, which the lord your god promised you; so shall the lord
bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off
this good land which the lord your god hath given you.

23:16 when ye have transgressed the covenant of the lord your god,
which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the lord be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you.

24:1 and joshua gathered all the tribes of israel to shechem, and
called for the elders of israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
god.

24:2 and joshua said unto all the people, thus saith the lord god of
israel, your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even terah, the father of abraham, and the father of nachor: and they
served other gods.

24:3 and i took your father abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him isaac.

24:4 and i gave unto isaac jacob and esau: and i gave unto esau mount
seir, to possess it; but jacob and his children went down into egypt.

24:5 i sent moses also and aaron, and i plagued egypt, according to
that which i did among them: and afterward i brought you out.

24:6 and i brought your fathers out of egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the red sea.

24:7 and when they cried unto the lord, he put darkness between you
and the egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them;
and your eyes have seen what i have done in egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wilderness a long season.

24:8 and i brought you into the land of the amorites, which dwelt on
the other side jordan; and they fought with you: and i gave them into
your hand, that ye might possess their land; and i destroyed them from
before you.

24:9 then balak the son of zippor, king of moab, arose and warred
against israel, and sent and called balaam the son of beor to curse
you: 24:10 but i would not hearken unto balaam; therefore he blessed
you still: so i delivered you out of his hand.

24:11 and you went over jordan, and came unto jericho: and the men of
jericho fought against you, the amorites, and the perizzites, and the
canaanites, and the hittites, and the girgashites, the hivites, and
the jebusites; and i delivered them into your hand.

24:12 and i sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from
before you, even the two kings of the amorites; but not with thy
sword, nor with thy bow.

24:13 and i have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and
cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and
oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.

24:14 now therefore fear the lord, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
side of the flood, and in egypt; and serve ye the lord.

24:15 and if it seem evil unto you to serve the lord, choose you this
day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served
that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
lord.

24:16 and the people answered and said, god forbid that we should
forsake the lord, to serve other gods; 24:17 for the lord our god, he
it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
the people through whom we passed: 24:18 and the lord drave out from
before us all the people, even the amorites which dwelt in the land:
therefore will we also serve the lord; for he is our god.

24:19 and joshua said unto the people, ye cannot serve the lord: for
he is an holy god; he is a jealous god; he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins.

24:20 if ye forsake the lord, and serve strange gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you
good.

24:21 and the people said unto joshua, nay; but we will serve the
lord.

24:22 and joshua said unto the people, ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the lord, to serve him. and they
said, we are witnesses.

24:23 now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are
among you, and incline your heart unto the lord god of israel.

24:24 and the people said unto joshua, the lord our god will we serve,
and his voice will we obey.

24:25 so joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them
a statute and an ordinance in shechem.

24:26 and joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of god, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
sanctuary of the lord.

24:27 and joshua said unto all the people, behold, this stone shall be
a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the lord which
he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye
deny your god.

24:28 so joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.

24:29 and it came to pass after these things, that joshua the son of
nun, the servant of the lord, died, being an hundred and ten years
old.

24:30 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathserah, which is in mount ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of gaash.

24:31 and israel served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived joshua, and which had known all the
works of the lord, that he had done for israel.

24:32 and the bones of joseph, which the children of israel brought up
out of egypt, buried they in shechem, in a parcel of ground which
jacob bought of the sons of hamor the father of shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
joseph.

24:33 and eleazar the son of aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
ephraim.




the book of judges


1:1 now after the death of joshua it came to pass, that the children
of israel asked the lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the
canaanites first, to fight against them?  1:2 and the lord said, judah
shall go up: behold, i have delivered the land into his hand.

1:3 and judah said unto simeon his brother, come up with me into my
lot, that we may fight against the canaanites; and i likewise will go
with thee into thy lot. so simeon went with him.

1:4 and judah went up; and the lord delivered the canaanites and the
perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in bezek ten
thousand men.

1:5 and they found adonibezek in bezek: and they fought against him,
and they slew the canaanites and the perizzites.

1:6 but adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him,
and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.

1:7 and adonibezek said, threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs
and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as i
have done, so god hath requited me. and they brought him to jerusalem,
and there he died.

1:8 now the children of judah had fought against jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city
on fire.

1:9 and afterward the children of judah went down to fight against the
canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
valley.

1:10 and judah went against the canaanites that dwelt in hebron: (now
the name of hebron before was kirjatharba:) and they slew sheshai, and
ahiman, and talmai.

1:11 and from thence he went against the inhabitants of debir: and the
name of debir before was kirjathsepher: 1:12 and caleb said, he that
smiteth kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will i give achsah my
daughter to wife.

1:13 and othniel the son of kenaz, caleb's younger brother, took it:
and he gave him achsah his daughter to wife.

1:14 and it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and caleb
said unto her, what wilt thou?  1:15 and she said unto him, give me a
blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of
water. and caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.

1:16 and the children of the kenite, moses' father in law, went up out
of the city of palm trees with the children of judah into the
wilderness of judah, which lieth in the south of arad; and they went
and dwelt among the people.

1:17 and judah went with simeon his brother, and they slew the
canaanites that inhabited zephath, and utterly destroyed it. and the
name of the city was called hormah.

1:18 also judah took gaza with the coast thereof, and askelon with the
coast thereof, and ekron with the coast thereof.

1:19 and the lord was with judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron.

1:20 and they gave hebron unto caleb, as moses said: and he expelled
thence the three sons of anak.

1:21 and the children of benjamin did not drive out the jebusites that
inhabited jerusalem; but the jebusites dwell with the children of
benjamin in jerusalem unto this day.

1:22 and the house of joseph, they also went up against bethel: and
the lord was with them.

1:23 and the house of joseph sent to descry bethel. (now the name of
the city before was luz.)  1:24 and the spies saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they said unto him, shew us, we pray thee, the
entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.

1:25 and when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all
his family.

1:26 and the man went into the land of the hittites, and built a city,
and called the name thereof luz: which is the name thereof unto this
day.

1:27 neither did manasseh drive out the inhabitants of bethshean and
her towns, nor taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of dor and
her towns, nor the inhabitants of ibleam and her towns, nor the
inhabitants of megiddo and her towns: but the canaanites would dwell
in that land.

1:28 and it came to pass, when israel was strong, that they put the
canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.

1:29 neither did ephraim drive out the canaanites that dwelt in gezer;
but the canaanites dwelt in gezer among them.

1:30 neither did zebulun drive out the inhabitants of kitron, nor the
inhabitants of nahalol; but the canaanites dwelt among them, and
became tributaries.

1:31 neither did asher drive out the inhabitants of accho, nor the
inhabitants of zidon, nor of ahlab, nor of achzib, nor of helbah, nor
of aphik, nor of rehob: 1:32 but the asherites dwelt among the
canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them
out.

1:33 neither did naphtali drive out the inhabitants of bethshemesh,
nor the inhabitants of bethanath; but he dwelt among the canaanites,
the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of
bethshemesh and of bethanath became tributaries unto them.

1:34 and the amorites forced the children of dan into the mountain:
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 1:35 but
the amorites would dwell in mount heres in aijalon, and in shaalbim:
yet the hand of the house of joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries.

1:36 and the coast of the amorites was from the going up to akrabbim,
from the rock, and upward.

2:1 and an angel of the lord came up from gilgal to bochim, and said,
i made you to go up out of egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which i sware unto your fathers; and i said, i will never break my
covenant with you.

2:2 and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
have ye done this?  2:3 wherefore i also said, i will not drive them
out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and
their gods shall be a snare unto you.

2:4 and it came to pass, when the angel of the lord spake these words
unto all the children of israel, that the people lifted up their
voice, and wept.

2:5 and they called the name of that place bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the lord.

2:6 and when joshua had let the people go, the children of israel went
every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.

2:7 and the people served the lord all the days of joshua, and all the
days of the elders that outlived joshua, who had seen all the great
works of the lord, that he did for israel.

2:8 and joshua the son of nun, the servant of the lord, died, being an
hundred and ten years old.

2:9 and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
timnathheres, in the mount of ephraim, on the north side of the hill
gaash.

2:10 and also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers:
and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
lord, nor yet the works which he had done for israel.

2:11 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
served baalim: 2:12 and they forsook the lord god of their fathers,
which brought them out of the land of egypt, and followed other gods,
of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed
themselves unto them, and provoked the lord to anger.

2:13 and they forsook the lord, and served baal and ashtaroth.

2:14 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he
sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they
could not any longer stand before their enemies.

2:15 whithersoever they went out, the hand of the lord was against
them for evil, as the lord had said, and as the lord had sworn unto
them: and they were greatly distressed.

2:16 nevertheless the lord raised up judges, which delivered them out
of the hand of those that spoiled them.

2:17 and yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned
quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the
commandments of the lord; but they did not so.

2:18 and when the lord raised them up judges, then the lord was with
the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the
days of the judge: for it repented the lord because of their groanings
by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.

2:19 and it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned,
and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.

2:20 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel; and he said,
because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which i
commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 2:21 i
also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations
which joshua left when he died: 2:22 that through them i may prove
israel, whether they will keep the way of the lord to walk therein, as
their fathers did keep it, or not.

2:23 therefore the lord left those nations, without driving them out
hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of joshua.

3:1 now these are the nations which the lord left, to prove israel by
them, even as many of israel as had not known all the wars of canaan;
3:2 only that the generations of the children of israel might know, to
teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 3:3
namely, five lords of the philistines, and all the canaanites, and the
sidonians, and the hivites that dwelt in mount lebanon, from mount
baalhermon unto the entering in of hamath.

3:4 and they were to prove israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the commandments of the lord, which he commanded their
fathers by the hand of moses.

3:5 and the children of israel dwelt among the canaanites, hittites,
and amorites, and perizzites, and hivites, and jebusites: 3:6 and they
took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to
their sons, and served their gods.

3:7 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord, and
forgat the lord their god, and served baalim and the groves.

3:8 therefore the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he
sold them into the hand of chushanrishathaim king of mesopotamia: and
the children of israel served chushanrishathaim eight years.

3:9 and when the children of israel cried unto the lord, the lord
raised up a deliverer to the children of israel, who delivered them,
even othniel the son of kenaz, caleb's younger brother.

3:10 and the spirit of the lord came upon him, and he judged israel,
and went out to war: and the lord delivered chushanrishathaim king of
mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against
chushanrishathaim.

3:11 and the land had rest forty years. and othniel the son of kenaz
died.

3:12 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord: and the lord strengthened eglon the king of moab against israel,
because they had done evil in the sight of the lord.

3:13 and he gathered unto him the children of ammon and amalek, and
went and smote israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.

3:14 so the children of israel served eglon the king of moab eighteen
years.

3:15 but when the children of israel cried unto the lord, the lord
raised them up a deliverer, ehud the son of gera, a benjamite, a man
lefthanded: and by him the children of israel sent a present unto
eglon the king of moab.

3:16 but ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit
length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.

3:17 and he brought the present unto eglon king of moab: and eglon was
a very fat man.

3:18 and when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away
the people that bare the present.

3:19 but he himself turned again from the quarries that were by
gilgal, and said, i have a secret errand unto thee, o king: who said,
keep silence. and all that stood by him went out from him.

3:20 and ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour,
which he had for himself alone. and ehud said, i have a message from
god unto thee.

and he arose out of his seat.

3:21 and ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into his belly: 3:22 and the haft also went
in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.

3:23 then ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the
parlour upon him, and locked them.

3:24 when he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that,
behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, surely he
covereth his feet in his summer chamber.

3:25 and they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened
not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened
them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.

3:26 and ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the
quarries, and escaped unto seirath.

3:27 and it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in
the mountain of ephraim, and the children of israel went down with him
from the mount, and he before them.

3:28 and he said unto them, follow after me: for the lord hath
delivered your enemies the moabites into your hand. and they went down
after him, and took the fords of jordan toward moab, and suffered not
a man to pass over.

3:29 and they slew of moab at that time about ten thousand men, all
lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.

3:30 so moab was subdued that day under the hand of israel. and the
land had rest fourscore years.

3:31 and after him was shamgar the son of anath, which slew of the
philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered
israel.

4:1 and the children of israel again did evil in the sight of the
lord, when ehud was dead.

4:2 and the lord sold them into the hand of jabin king of canaan, that
reigned in hazor; the captain of whose host was sisera, which dwelt in
harosheth of the gentiles.

4:3 and the children of israel cried unto the lord: for he had nine
hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
children of israel.

4:4 and deborah, a prophetess, the wife of lapidoth, she judged israel
at that time.

4:5 and she dwelt under the palm tree of deborah between ramah and
bethel in mount ephraim: and the children of israel came up to her for
judgment.

4:6 and she sent and called barak the son of abinoam out of
kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, hath not the lord god of israel
commanded, saying, go and draw toward mount tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of naphtali and of the children of
zebulun?  4:7 and i will draw unto thee to the river kishon sisera,
the captain of jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and
i will deliver him into thine hand.

4:8 and barak said unto her, if thou wilt go with me, then i will go:
but if thou wilt not go with me, then i will not go.

4:9 and she said, i will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the lord
shall sell sisera into the hand of a woman. and deborah arose, and
went with barak to kedesh.

4:10 and barak called zebulun and naphtali to kedesh; and he went up
with ten thousand men at his feet: and deborah went up with him.

4:11 now heber the kenite, which was of the children of hobab the
father in law of moses, had severed himself from the kenites, and
pitched his tent unto the plain of zaanaim, which is by kedesh.

4:12 and they shewed sisera that barak the son of abinoam was gone up
to mount tabor.

4:13 and sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred
chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from
harosheth of the gentiles unto the river of kishon.

4:14 and deborah said unto barak, up; for this is the day in which the
lord hath delivered sisera into thine hand: is not the lord gone out
before thee? so barak went down from mount tabor, and ten thousand men
after him.

4:15 and the lord discomfited sisera, and all his chariots, and all
his host, with the edge of the sword before barak; so that sisera
lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.

4:16 but barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto
harosheth of the gentiles: and all the host of sisera fell upon the
edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.

4:17 howbeit sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of jael the wife
of heber the kenite: for there was peace between jabin the king of
hazor and the house of heber the kenite.

4:18 and jael went out to meet sisera, and said unto him, turn in, my
lord, turn in to me; fear not. and when he had turned in unto her into
the tent, she covered him with a mantle.

4:19 and he said unto her, give me, i pray thee, a little water to
drink; for i am thirsty. and she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him
drink, and covered him.

4:20 again he said unto her, stand in the door of the tent, and it
shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, is
there any man here? that thou shalt say, no.

4:21 then jael heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an
hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into
his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep
and weary. so he died.

4:22 and, behold, as barak pursued sisera, jael came out to meet him,
and said unto him, come, and i will shew thee the man whom thou
seekest. and when he came into her tent, behold, sisera lay dead, and
the nail was in his temples.

4:23 so god subdued on that day jabin the king of canaan before the
children of israel.

4:24 and the hand of the children of israel prospered, and prevailed
against jabin the king of canaan, until they had destroyed jabin king
of canaan.

5:1 then sang deborah and barak the son of abinoam on that day,
saying, 5:2 praise ye the lord for the avenging of israel, when the
people willingly offered themselves.

5:3 hear, o ye kings; give ear, o ye princes; i, even i, will sing
unto the lord; i will sing praise to the lord god of israel.

5:4 lord, when thou wentest out of seir, when thou marchedst out of
the field of edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the
clouds also dropped water.

5:5 the mountains melted from before the lord, even that sinai from
before the lord god of israel.

5:6 in the days of shamgar the son of anath, in the days of jael, the
highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.

5:7 the inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in israel,
until that i deborah arose, that i arose a mother in israel.

5:8 they chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield
or spear seen among forty thousand in israel?  5:9 my heart is toward
the governors of israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. bless ye the lord.

5:10 speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
walk by the way.

5:11 they that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places
of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the
lord, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages
in israel: then shall the people of the lord go down to the gates.

5:12 awake, awake, deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, barak,
and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of abinoam.

5:13 then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles
among the people: the lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

5:14 out of ephraim was there a root of them against amalek; after
thee, benjamin, among thy people; out of machir came down governors,
and out of zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.

5:15 and the princes of issachar were with deborah; even issachar, and
also barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. for the divisions of
reuben there were great thoughts of heart.

5:16 why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of
the flocks? for the divisions of reuben there were great searchings of
heart.

5:17 gilead abode beyond jordan: and why did dan remain in ships?
asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

5:18 zebulun and naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives
unto the death in the high places of the field.

5:19 the kings came and fought, then fought the kings of canaan in
taanach by the waters of megiddo; they took no gain of money.

5:20 they fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought
against sisera.

5:21 the river of kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the
river kishon. o my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.

5:22 then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings,
the pransings of their mighty ones.

5:23 curse ye meroz, said the angel of the lord, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the lord, to
the help of the lord against the mighty.

5:24 blessed above women shall jael the wife of heber the kenite be,
blessed shall she be above women in the tent.

5:25 he asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter
in a lordly dish.

5:26 she put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's
hammer; and with the hammer she smote sisera, she smote off his head,
when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.

5:27 at her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed,
he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.

5:28 the mother of sisera looked out at a window, and cried through
the lattice, why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the
wheels of his chariots?  5:29 her wise ladies answered her, yea, she
returned answer to herself, 5:30 have they not sped? have they not
divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to sisera a prey of
divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers
colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that
take the spoil?  5:31 so let all thine enemies perish, o lord: but let
them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. and
the land had rest forty years.

6:1 and the children of israel did evil in the sight of the lord: and
the lord delivered them into the hand of midian seven years.

6:2 and the hand of midian prevailed against israel: and because of
the midianites the children of israel made them the dens which are in
the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.

6:3 and so it was, when israel had sown, that the midianites came up,
and the amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up
against them; 6:4 and they encamped against them, and destroyed the
increase of the earth, till thou come unto gaza, and left no
sustenance for israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.

6:5 for they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came
as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were
without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.

6:6 and israel was greatly impoverished because of the midianites; and
the children of israel cried unto the lord.

6:7 and it came to pass, when the children of israel cried unto the
lord because of the midianites, 6:8 that the lord sent a prophet unto
the children of israel, which said unto them, thus saith the lord god
of israel, i brought you up from egypt, and brought you forth out of
the house of bondage; 6:9 and i delivered you out of the hand of the
egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave
them out from before you, and gave you their land; 6:10 and i said
unto you, i am the lord your god; fear not the gods of the amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.

6:11 and there came an angel of the lord, and sat under an oak which
was in ophrah, that pertained unto joash the abiezrite: and his son
gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the
midianites.

6:12 and the angel of the lord appeared unto him, and said unto him,
the lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.

6:13 and gideon said unto him, oh my lord, if the lord be with us, why
then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our
fathers told us of, saying, did not the lord bring us up from egypt?
but now the lord hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
the midianites.

6:14 and the lord looked upon him, and said, go in this thy might, and
thou shalt save israel from the hand of the midianites: have not i
sent thee?  6:15 and he said unto him, oh my lord, wherewith shall i
save israel?  behold, my family is poor in manasseh, and i am the
least in my father's house.

6:16 and the lord said unto him, surely i will be with thee, and thou
shalt smite the midianites as one man.

6:17 and he said unto him, if now i have found grace in thy sight,
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.

6:18 depart not hence, i pray thee, until i come unto thee, and bring
forth my present, and set it before thee. and he said, i will tarry
until thou come again.

6:19 and gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of
an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth
in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.

6:20 and the angel of god said unto him, take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth.
and he did so.

6:21 then the angel of the lord put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. then the angel of the lord departed out of his
sight.

6:22 and when gideon perceived that he was an angel of the lord,
gideon said, alas, o lord god! for because i have seen an angel of the
lord face to face.

6:23 and the lord said unto him, peace be unto thee; fear not: thou
shalt not die.

6:24 then gideon built an altar there unto the lord, and called it
jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in ophrah of the abiezrites.

6:25 and it came to pass the same night, that the lord said unto him,
take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven
years old, and throw down the altar of baal that thy father hath, and
cut down the grove that is by it: 6:26 and build an altar unto the
lord thy god upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take
the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the
grove which thou shalt cut down.

6:27 then gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the lord had
said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's
household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day,
that he did it by night.

6:28 and when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold,
the altar of baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was
by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was
built.

6:29 and they said one to another, who hath done this thing? and when
they enquired and asked, they said, gideon the son of joash hath done
this thing.

6:30 then the men of the city said unto joash, bring out thy son, that
he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of baal, and because
he hath cut down the grove that was by it.

6:31 and joash said unto all that stood against him, will ye plead for
baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
himself, because one hath cast down his altar.

6:32 therefore on that day he called him jerubbaal, saying, let baal
plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.

6:33 then all the midianites and the amalekites and the children of
the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the
valley of jezreel.

6:34 but the spirit of the lord came upon gideon, and he blew a
trumpet; and abiezer was gathered after him.

6:35 and he sent messengers throughout all manasseh; who also was
gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto asher, and unto
zebulun, and unto naphtali; and they came up to meet them.

6:36 and gideon said unto god, if thou wilt save israel by mine hand,
as thou hast said, 6:37 behold, i will put a fleece of wool in the
floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all
the earth beside, then shall i know that thou wilt save israel by mine
hand, as thou hast said.

6:38 and it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the
fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water.

6:39 and gideon said unto god, let not thine anger be hot against me,
and i will speak but this once: let me prove, i pray thee, but this
once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon
all the ground let there be dew.

6:40 and god did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only,
and there was dew on all the ground.

7:1 then jerubbaal, who is gideon, and all the people that were with
him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of harod: so that the
host of the midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of
moreh, in the valley.

7:2 and the lord said unto gideon, the people that are with thee are
too many for me to give the midianites into their hands, lest israel
vaunt themselves against me, saying, mine own hand hath saved me.

7:3 now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying,
whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from
mount gilead. and there returned of the people twenty and two
thousand; and there remained ten thousand.

7:4 and the lord said unto gideon, the people are yet too many; bring
them down unto the water, and i will try them for thee there: and it
shall be, that of whom i say unto thee, this shall go with thee, the
same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever i say unto thee, this shall
not go with thee, the same shall not go.

7:5 so he brought down the people unto the water: and the lord said
unto gideon, every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a
dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that
boweth down upon his knees to drink.

7:6 and the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their
mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed
down upon their knees to drink water.

7:7 and the lord said unto gideon, by the three hundred men that
lapped will i save you, and deliver the midianites into thine hand:
and let all the other people go every man unto his place.

7:8 so the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and
he sent all the rest of israel every man unto his tent, and retained
those three hundred men: and the host of midian was beneath him in the
valley.

7:9 and it came to pass the same night, that the lord said unto him,
arise, get thee down unto the host; for i have delivered it into thine
hand.

7:10 but if thou fear to go down, go thou with phurah thy servant down
to the host: 7:11 and thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward
shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. then went
he down with phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that
were in the host.

7:12 and the midianites and the amalekites and all the children of the
east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and
their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for
multitude.

7:13 and when gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a
dream unto his fellow, and said, behold, i dreamed a dream, and, lo, a
cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of midian, and came unto a
tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay
along.

7:14 and his fellow answered and said, this is nothing else save the
sword of gideon the son of joash, a man of israel: for into his hand
hath god delivered midian, and all the host.

7:15 and it was so, when gideon heard the telling of the dream, and
the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the
host of israel, and said, arise; for the lord hath delivered into your
hand the host of midian.

7:16 and he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers.

7:17 and he said unto them, look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
when i come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as i do, so
shall ye do.

7:18 when i blow with a trumpet, i and all that are with me, then blow
ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, the sword
of the lord, and of gideon.

7:19 so gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the
outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had
but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers that were in their hands.

7:20 and the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in
their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, the sword of the
lord, and of gideon.

7:21 and they stood every man in his place round about the camp; and
all the host ran, and cried, and fled.

7:22 and the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the lord set every
man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the
host fled to bethshittah in zererath, and to the border of
abelmeholah, unto tabbath.

7:23 and the men of israel gathered themselves together out of
naphtali, and out of asher, and out of all manasseh, and pursued after
the midianites.

7:24 and gideon sent messengers throughout all mount ephraim, saying,
come down against the midianites, and take before them the waters unto
bethbarah and jordan. then all the men of ephraim gathered themselves
together, and took the waters unto bethbarah and jordan.

7:25 and they took two princes of the midianites, oreb and zeeb; and
they slew oreb upon the rock oreb, and zeeb they slew at the winepress
of zeeb, and pursued midian, and brought the heads of oreb and zeeb to
gideon on the other side jordan.

8:1 and the men of ephraim said unto him, why hast thou served us
thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
midianites?  and they did chide with him sharply.

8:2 and he said unto them, what have i done now in comparison of you?
is not the gleaning of the grapes of ephraim better than the vintage
of abiezer?  8:3 god hath delivered into your hands the princes of
midian, oreb and zeeb: and what was i able to do in comparison of you?
then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.

8:4 and gideon came to jordan, and passed over, he, and the three
hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.

8:5 and he said unto the men of succoth, give, i pray you, loaves of
bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and i am
pursuing after zebah and zalmunna, kings of midian.

8:6 and the princes of succoth said, are the hands of zebah and
zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?
8:7 and gideon said, therefore when the lord hath delivered zebah and
zalmunna into mine hand, then i will tear your flesh with the thorns
of the wilderness and with briers.

8:8 and he went up thence to penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and
the men of penuel answered him as the men of succoth had answered him.

8:9 and he spake also unto the men of penuel, saying, when i come
again in peace, i will break down this tower.

8:10 now zebah and zalmunna were in karkor, and their hosts with them,
about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the
children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand
men that drew sword.

8:11 and gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the
east of nobah and jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was
secure.

8:12 and when zebah and zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took
the two kings of midian, zebah and zalmunna, and discomfited all the
host.

8:13 and gideon the son of joash returned from battle before the sun
was up, 8:14 and caught a young man of the men of succoth, and
enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of succoth, and
the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.

8:15 and he came unto the men of succoth, and said, behold zebah and
zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, are the hands of zebah
and zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men
that are weary?  8:16 and he took the elders of the city, and thorns
of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of
succoth.

8:17 and he beat down the tower of penuel, and slew the men of the
city.

8:18 then said he unto zebah and zalmunna, what manner of men were
they whom ye slew at tabor? and they answered, as thou art, so were
they; each one resembled the children of a king.

8:19 and he said, they were my brethren, even the sons of my mother:
as the lord liveth, if ye had saved them alive, i would not slay you.

8:20 and he said unto jether his firstborn, up, and slay them. but the
youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.

8:21 then zebah and zalmunna said, rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
the man is, so is his strength. and gideon arose, and slew zebah and
zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels'
necks.

8:22 then the men of israel said unto gideon, rule thou over us, both
thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us
from the hand of midian.

8:23 and gideon said unto them, i will not rule over you, neither
shall my son rule over you: the lord shall rule over you.

8:24 and gideon said unto them, i would desire a request of you, that
ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (for they had
golden earrings, because they were ishmaelites.)  8:25 and they
answered, we will willingly give them. and they spread a garment, and
did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.

8:26 and the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a
thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and
collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of midian, and
beside the chains that were about their camels' necks.

8:27 and gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in
ophrah: and all israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing
became a snare unto gideon, and to his house.

8:28 thus was midian subdued before the children of israel, so that
they lifted up their heads no more. and the country was in quietness
forty years in the days of gideon.

8:29 and jerubbaal the son of joash went and dwelt in his own house.

8:30 and gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for
he had many wives.

8:31 and his concubine that was in shechem, she also bare him a son,
whose name he called abimelech.

8:32 and gideon the son of joash died in a good old age, and was
buried in the sepulchre of joash his father, in ophrah of the
abiezrites.

8:33 and it came to pass, as soon as gideon was dead, that the
children of israel turned again, and went a whoring after baalim, and
made baalberith their god.

8:34 and the children of israel remembered not the lord their god, who
had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every
side: 8:35 neither shewed they kindness to the house of jerubbaal,
namely, gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto
israel.

9:1 and abimelech the son of jerubbaal went to shechem unto his
mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of
the house of his mother's father, saying, 9:2 speak, i pray you, in
the ears of all the men of shechem, whether is better for you, either
that all the sons of jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons,
reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that i am
your bone and your flesh.

9:3 and his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men
of shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow
abimelech; for they said, he is our brother.

9:4 and they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the
house of baalberith, wherewith abimelech hired vain and light persons,
which followed him.

9:5 and he went unto his father's house at ophrah, and slew his
brethren the sons of jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon
one stone: notwithstanding yet jotham the youngest son of jerubbaal
was left; for he hid himself.

9:6 and all the men of shechem gathered together, and all the house of
millo, and went, and made abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that was in shechem.

9:7 and when they told it to jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them,
hearken unto me, ye men of shechem, that god may hearken unto you.

9:8 the trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and
they said unto the olive tree, reign thou over us.

9:9 but the olive tree said unto them, should i leave my fatness,
wherewith by me they honour god and man, and go to be promoted over
the trees?  9:10 and the trees said to the fig tree, come thou, and
reign over us.

9:11 but the fig tree said unto them, should i forsake my sweetness,
and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?  9:12 then
said the trees unto the vine, come thou, and reign over us.

9:13 and the vine said unto them, should i leave my wine, which
cheereth god and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?  9:14 then
said all the trees unto the bramble, come thou, and reign over us.

9:15 and the bramble said unto the trees, if in truth ye anoint me
king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of lebanon.

9:16 now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye
have made abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with jerubbaal and
his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his
hands; 9:17 (for my father fought for you, and adventured his life
far, and delivered you out of the hand of midian: 9:18 and ye are
risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons,
threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made abimelech,
the son of his maidservant, king over the men of shechem, because he
is your brother;) 9:19 if ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with
jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in abimelech,
and let him also rejoice in you: 9:20 but if not, let fire come out
from abimelech, and devour the men of shechem, and the house of millo;
and let fire come out from the men of shechem, and from the house of
millo, and devour abimelech.

9:21 and jotham ran away, and fled, and went to beer, and dwelt there,
for fear of abimelech his brother.

9:22 when abimelech had reigned three years over israel, 9:23 then god
sent an evil spirit between abimelech and the men of shechem; and the
men of shechem dealt treacherously with abimelech: 9:24 that the
cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of jerubbaal might come,
and their blood be laid upon abimelech their brother, which slew them;
and upon the men of shechem, which aided him in the killing of his
brethren.

9:25 and the men of shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of
the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them:
and it was told abimelech.

9:26 and gaal the son of ebed came with his brethren, and went over to
shechem: and the men of shechem put their confidence in him.

9:27 and they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards,
and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their
god, and did eat and drink, and cursed abimelech.

9:28 and gaal the son of ebed said, who is abimelech, and who is
shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of jerubbaal? and
zebul his officer? serve the men of hamor the father of shechem: for
why should we serve him?  9:29 and would to god this people were under
my hand! then would i remove abimelech. and he said to abimelech,
increase thine army, and come out.

9:30 and when zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of gaal the
son of ebed, his anger was kindled.

9:31 and he sent messengers unto abimelech privily, saying, behold,
gaal the son of ebed and his brethren be come to shechem; and, behold,
they fortify the city against thee.

9:32 now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee,
and lie in wait in the field: 9:33 and it shall be, that in the
morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon
the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come
out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find
occasion.

9:34 and abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by
night, and they laid wait against shechem in four companies.

9:35 and gaal the son of ebed went out, and stood in the entering of
the gate of the city: and abimelech rose up, and the people that were
with him, from lying in wait.

9:36 and when gaal saw the people, he said to zebul, behold, there
come people down from the top of the mountains. and zebul said unto
him, thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.

9:37 and gaal spake again, and said, see there come people down by the
middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of
meonenim.

9:38 then said zebul unto him, where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
saidst, who is abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the
people that thou hast despised? go out, i pray now, and fight with
them.

9:39 and gaal went out before the men of shechem, and fought with
abimelech.

9:40 and abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were
overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.

9:41 and abimelech dwelt at arumah: and zebul thrust out gaal and his
brethren, that they should not dwell in shechem.

9:42 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into
the field; and they told abimelech.

9:43 and he took the people, and divided them into three companies,
and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were
come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote
them.

9:44 and abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward,
and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other
companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew
them.

9:45 and abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took
the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the
city, and sowed it with salt.

9:46 and when all the men of the tower of shechem heard that, they
entered into an hold of the house of the god berith.

9:47 and it was told abimelech, that all the men of the tower of
shechem were gathered together.

9:48 and abimelech gat him up to mount zalmon, he and all the people
that were with him; and abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut
down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder,
and said unto the people that were with him, what ye have seen me do,
make haste, and do as i have done.

9:49 and all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and
followed abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire
upon them; so that all the men of the tower of shechem died also,
about a thousand men and women.

9:50 then went abimelech to thebez, and encamped against thebez, and
took it.

9:51 but there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled
all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them,
and gat them up to the top of the tower.

9:52 and abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.

9:53 and a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon abimelech's
head, and all to brake his skull.

9:54 then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and
said unto him, draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, a
women slew him. and his young man thrust him through, and he died.

9:55 and when the men of israel saw that abimelech was dead, they
departed every man unto his place.

9:56 thus god rendered the wickedness of abimelech, which he did unto
his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 9:57 and all the evil of
the men of shechem did god render upon their heads: and upon them came
the curse of jotham the son of jerubbaal.

10:1 and after abimelech there arose to defend israel tola the son of
puah, the son of dodo, a man of issachar; and he dwelt in shamir in
mount ephraim.

10:2 and he judged israel twenty and three years, and died, and was
buried in shamir.

10:3 and after him arose jair, a gileadite, and judged israel twenty
and two years.

10:4 and he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they
had thirty cities, which are called havothjair unto this day, which
are in the land of gilead.

10:5 and jair died, and was buried in camon.

10:6 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord, and served baalim, and ashtaroth, and the gods of syria, and the
gods of zidon, and the gods of moab, and the gods of the children of
ammon, and the gods of the philistines, and forsook the lord, and
served not him.

10:7 and the anger of the lord was hot against israel, and he sold
them into the hands of the philistines, and into the hands of the
children of ammon.

10:8 and that year they vexed and oppressed the children of israel:
eighteen years, all the children of israel that were on the other side
jordan in the land of the amorites, which is in gilead.

10:9 moreover the children of ammon passed over jordan to fight also
against judah, and against benjamin, and against the house of ephraim;
so that israel was sore distressed.

10:10 and the children of israel cried unto the lord, saying, we have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our god, and also
served baalim.

10:11 and the lord said unto the children of israel, did not i deliver
you from the egyptians, and from the amorites, from the children of
ammon, and from the philistines?  10:12 the zidonians also, and the
amalekites, and the maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and
i delivered you out of their hand.

10:13 yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore i will
deliver you no more.

10:14 go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation.

10:15 and the children of israel said unto the lord, we have sinned:
do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we
pray thee, this day.

10:16 and they put away the strange gods from among them, and served
the lord: and his soul was grieved for the misery of israel.

10:17 then the children of ammon were gathered together, and encamped
in gilead. and the children of israel assembled themselves together,
and encamped in mizpeh.

10:18 and the people and princes of gilead said one to another, what
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of ammon? he
shall be head over all the inhabitants of gilead.

11:1 now jephthah the gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was
the son of an harlot: and gilead begat jephthah.

11:2 and gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and
they thrust out jephthah, and said unto him, thou shalt not inherit in
our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.

11:3 then jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of
tob: and there were gathered vain men to jephthah, and went out with
him.

11:4 and it came to pass in process of time, that the children of
ammon made war against israel.

11:5 and it was so, that when the children of ammon made war against
israel, the elders of gilead went to fetch jephthah out of the land of
tob: 11:6 and they said unto jephthah, come, and be our captain, that
we may fight with the children of ammon.

11:7 and jephthah said unto the elders of gilead, did not ye hate me,
and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now
when ye are in distress?  11:8 and the elders of gilead said unto
jephthah, therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go
with us, and fight against the children of ammon, and be our head over
all the inhabitants of gilead.

11:9 and jephthah said unto the elders of gilead, if ye bring me home
again to fight against the children of ammon, and the lord deliver
them before me, shall i be your head?  11:10 and the elders of gilead
said unto jephthah, the lord be witness between us, if we do not so
according to thy words.

11:11 then jephthah went with the elders of gilead, and the people
made him head and captain over them: and jephthah uttered all his
words before the lord in mizpeh.

11:12 and jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of
ammon, saying, what hast thou to do with me, that thou art come
against me to fight in my land?  11:13 and the king of the children of
ammon answered unto the messengers of jephthah, because israel took
away my land, when they came up out of egypt, from arnon even unto
jabbok, and unto jordan: now therefore restore those lands again
peaceably.

11:14 and jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children
of ammon: 11:15 and said unto him, thus saith jephthah, israel took
not away the land of moab, nor the land of the children of ammon:
11:16 but when israel came up from egypt, and walked through the
wilderness unto the red sea, and came to kadesh; 11:17 then israel
sent messengers unto the king of edom, saying, let me, i pray thee,
pass through thy land: but the king of edom would not hearken thereto.
and in like manner they sent unto the king of moab: but he would not
consent: and israel abode in kadesh.

11:18 then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the
land of edom, and the land of moab, and came by the east side of the
land of moab, and pitched on the other side of arnon, but came not
within the border of moab: for arnon was the border of moab.

11:19 and israel sent messengers unto sihon king of the amorites, the
king of heshbon; and israel said unto him, let us pass, we pray thee,
through thy land into my place.

11:20 but sihon trusted not israel to pass through his coast: but
sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in jahaz, and
fought against israel.

11:21 and the lord god of israel delivered sihon and all his people
into the hand of israel, and they smote them: so israel possessed all
the land of the amorites, the inhabitants of that country.

11:22 and they possessed all the coasts of the amorites, from arnon
even unto jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto jordan.

11:23 so now the lord god of israel hath dispossessed the amorites
from before his people israel, and shouldest thou possess it?  11:24
wilt not thou possess that which chemosh thy god giveth thee to
possess? so whomsoever the lord our god shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess.

11:25 and now art thou any thing better than balak the son of zippor,
king of moab? did he ever strive against israel, or did he ever fight
against them, 11:26 while israel dwelt in heshbon and her towns, and
in aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the
coasts of arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover
them within that time?  11:27 wherefore i have not sinned against
thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the lord the judge be
judge this day between the children of israel and the children of
ammon.

11:28 howbeit the king of the children of ammon hearkened not unto the
words of jephthah which he sent him.

11:29 then the spirit of the lord came upon jephthah, and he passed
over gilead, and manasseh, and passed over mizpeh of gilead, and from
mizpeh of gilead he passed over unto the children of ammon.

11:30 and jephthah vowed a vow unto the lord, and said, if thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of ammon into mine hands, 11:31 then
it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to
meet me, when i return in peace from the children of ammon, shall
surely be the lord's, and i will offer it up for a burnt offering.

11:32 so jephthah passed over unto the children of ammon to fight
against them; and the lord delivered them into his hands.

11:33 and he smote them from aroer, even till thou come to minnith,
even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very
great slaughter. thus the children of ammon were subdued before the
children of israel.

11:34 and jephthah came to mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his
daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she
was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.

11:35 and it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes,
and said, alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou
art one of them that trouble me: for i have opened my mouth unto the
lord, and i cannot go back.

11:36 and she said unto him, my father, if thou hast opened thy mouth
unto the lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of
thy mouth; forasmuch as the lord hath taken vengeance for thee of
thine enemies, even of the children of ammon.

11:37 and she said unto her father, let this thing be done for me: let
me alone two months, that i may go up and down upon the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, i and my fellows.

11:38 and he said, go. and he sent her away for two months: and she
went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the
mountains.

11:39 and it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned
unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had
vowed: and she knew no man. and it was a custom in israel, 11:40 that
the daughters of israel went yearly to lament the daughter of jephthah
the gileadite four days in a year.

12:1 and the men of ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
northward, and said unto jephthah, wherefore passedst thou over to
fight against the children of ammon, and didst not call us to go with
thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.

12:2 and jephthah said unto them, i and my people were at great strife
with the children of ammon; and when i called you, ye delivered me not
out of their hands.

12:3 and when i saw that ye delivered me not, i put my life in my
hands, and passed over against the children of ammon, and the lord
delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me
this day, to fight against me?  12:4 then jephthah gathered together
all the men of gilead, and fought with ephraim: and the men of gilead
smote ephraim, because they said, ye gileadites are fugitives of
ephraim among the ephraimites, and among the manassites.

12:5 and the gileadites took the passages of jordan before the
ephraimites: and it was so, that when those ephraimites which were
escaped said, let me go over; that the men of gilead said unto him,
art thou an ephraimite? if he said, nay; 12:6 then said they unto him,
say now shibboleth: and he said sibboleth: for he could not frame to
pronounce it right. then they took him, and slew him at the passages
of jordan: and there fell at that time of the ephraimites forty and
two thousand.

12:7 and jephthah judged israel six years. then died jephthah the
gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of gilead.

12:8 and after him ibzan of bethlehem judged israel.

12:9 and he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent
abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. and he
judged israel seven years.

12:10 then died ibzan, and was buried at bethlehem.

12:11 and after him elon, a zebulonite, judged israel; and he judged
israel ten years.

12:12 and elon the zebulonite died, and was buried in aijalon in the
country of zebulun.

12:13 and after him abdon the son of hillel, a pirathonite, judged
israel.

12:14 and he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on
threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged israel eight years.

12:15 and abdon the son of hillel the pirathonite died, and was buried
in pirathon in the land of ephraim, in the mount of the amalekites.

13:1 and the children of israel did evil again in the sight of the
lord; and the lord delivered them into the hand of the philistines
forty years.

13:2 and there was a certain man of zorah, of the family of the
danites, whose name was manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.

13:3 and the angel of the lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto
her, behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son.

13:4 now therefore beware, i pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong
drink, and eat not any unclean thing: 13:5 for, lo, thou shalt
conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the
child shall be a nazarite unto god from the womb: and he shall begin
to deliver israel out of the hand of the philistines.

13:6 then the woman came and told her husband, saying, a man of god
came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel
of god, very terrible: but i asked him not whence he was, neither told
he me his name: 13:7 but he said unto me, behold, thou shalt conceive,
and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat
any unclean thing: for the child shall be a nazarite to god from the
womb to the day of his death.

13:8 then manoah intreated the lord, and said, o my lord, let the man
of god which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we
shall do unto the child that shall be born.

13:9 and god hearkened to the voice of manoah; and the angel of god
came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but manoah her
husband was not with her.

13:10 and the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and
said unto him, behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto
me the other day.

13:11 and manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man,
and said unto him, art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? and
he said, i am.

13:12 and manoah said, now let thy words come to pass. how shall we
order the child, and how shall we do unto him?  13:13 and the angel of
the lord said unto manoah, of all that i said unto the woman let her
beware.

13:14 she may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither
let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all
that i commanded her let her observe.

13:15 and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, i pray thee, let us
detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.

13:16 and the angel of the lord said unto manoah, though thou detain
me, i will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt
offering, thou must offer it unto the lord. for manoah knew not that
he was an angel of the lord.

13:17 and manoah said unto the angel of the lord, what is thy name,
that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?  13:18 and
the angel of the lord said unto him, why askest thou thus after my
name, seeing it is secret?  13:19 so manoah took a kid with a meat
offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the lord: and the angel did
wonderously; and manoah and his wife looked on.

13:20 for it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from
off the altar, that the angel of the lord ascended in the flame of the
altar. and manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces
to the ground.

13:21 but the angel of the lord did no more appear to manoah and to
his wife. then manoah knew that he was an angel of the lord.

13:22 and manoah said unto his wife, we shall surely die, because we
have seen god.

13:23 but his wife said unto him, if the lord were pleased to kill us,
he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as
at this time have told us such things as these.

13:24 and the woman bare a son, and called his name samson: and the
child grew, and the lord blessed him.

13:25 and the spirit of the lord began to move him at times in the
camp of dan between zorah and eshtaol.

14:1 and samson went down to timnath, and saw a woman in timnath of
the daughters of the philistines.

14:2 and he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, i
have seen a woman in timnath of the daughters of the philistines: now
therefore get her for me to wife.

14:3 then his father and his mother said unto him, is there never a
woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people,
that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised philistines? and
samson said unto his father, get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.

14:4 but his father and his mother knew not that it was of the lord,
that he sought an occasion against the philistines: for at that time
the philistines had dominion over israel.

14:5 then went samson down, and his father and his mother, to timnath,
and came to the vineyards of timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared
against him.

14:6 and the spirit of the lord came mightily upon him, and he rent
him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but
he told not his father or his mother what he had done.

14:7 and he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased
samson well.

14:8 and after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to
see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees
and honey in the carcase of the lion.

14:9 and he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to
his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told
not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.

14:10 so his father went down unto the woman: and samson made there a
feast; for so used the young men to do.

14:11 and it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty
companions to be with him.

14:12 and samson said unto them, i will now put forth a riddle unto
you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the
feast, and find it out, then i will give you thirty sheets and thirty
change of garments: 14:13 but if ye cannot declare it me, then shall
ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. and they said
unto him, put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.

14:14 and he said unto them, out of the eater came forth meat, and out
of the strong came forth sweetness. and they could not in three days
expound the riddle.

14:15 and it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto
samson's wife, entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the
riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire: have ye
called us to take that we have? is it not so?  14:16 and samson's wife
wept before him, and said, thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not:
thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast
not told it me. and he said unto her, behold, i have not told it my
father nor my mother, and shall i tell it thee?  14:17 and she wept
before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to
pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon
him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.

14:18 and the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before
the sun went down, what is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger
than a lion?  and he said unto them, if ye had not plowed with my
heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.

14:19 and the spirit of the lord came upon him, and he went down to
ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave
change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. and his anger
was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.

14:20 but samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used
as his friend.

15:1 but it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat
harvest, that samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, i will
go in to my wife into the chamber. but her father would not suffer him
to go in.

15:2 and her father said, i verily thought that thou hadst utterly
hated her; therefore i gave her to thy companion: is not her younger
sister fairer than she? take her, i pray thee, instead of her.

15:3 and samson said concerning them, now shall i be more blameless
than the philistines, though i do them a displeasure.

15:4 and samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took
firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst
between two tails.

15:5 and when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the
standing corn of the philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and
also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.

15:6 then the philistines said, who hath done this? and they answered,
samson, the son in law of the timnite, because he had taken his wife,
and given her to his companion. and the philistines came up, and burnt
her and her father with fire.

15:7 and samson said unto them, though ye have done this, yet will i
be avenged of you, and after that i will cease.

15:8 and he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he
went down and dwelt in the top of the rock etam.

15:9 then the philistines went up, and pitched in judah, and spread
themselves in lehi.

15:10 and the men of judah said, why are ye come up against us? and
they answered, to bind samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath
done to us.

15:11 then three thousand men of judah went to the top of the rock
etam, and said to samson, knowest thou not that the philistines are
rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? and he said
unto them, as they did unto me, so have i done unto them.

15:12 and they said unto him, we are come down to bind thee, that we
may deliver thee into the hand of the philistines. and samson said
unto them, swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.

15:13 and they spake unto him, saying, no; but we will bind thee fast,
and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee.
and they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the
rock.

15:14 and when he came unto lehi, the philistines shouted against him:
and the spirit of the lord came mightily upon him, and the cords that
were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his
bands loosed from off his hands.

15:15 and he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand,
and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.

15:16 and samson said, with the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps,
with the jaw of an ass have i slain a thousand men.

15:17 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that
he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place
ramathlehi.

15:18 and he was sore athirst, and called on the lord, and said, thou
hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and
now shall i die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the
uncircumcised?  15:19 but god clave an hollow place that was in the
jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit
came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof
enhakkore, which is in lehi unto this day.

15:20 and he judged israel in the days of the philistines twenty
years.

16:1 then went samson to gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in
unto her.

16:2 and it was told the gazites, saying, samson is come hither. and
they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of
the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, in the morning, when
it is day, we shall kill him.

16:3 and samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the
doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with
them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them
up to the top of an hill that is before hebron.

16:4 and it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the
valley of sorek, whose name was delilah.

16:5 and the lords of the philistines came up unto her, and said unto
her, entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what
means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him;
and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.

16:6 and delilah said to samson, tell me, i pray thee, wherein thy
great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict
thee.

16:7 and samson said unto her, if they bind me with seven green withs
that were never dried, then shall i be weak, and be as another man.

16:8 then the lords of the philistines brought up to her seven green
withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.

16:9 now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the
chamber.

and she said unto him, the philistines be upon thee, samson. and he
brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the
fire. so his strength was not known.

16:10 and delilah said unto samson, behold, thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: now tell me, i pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be
bound.

16:11 and he said unto her, if they bind me fast with new ropes that
never were occupied, then shall i be weak, and be as another man.

16:12 delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and
said unto him, the philistines be upon thee, samson. and there were
liers in wait abiding in the chamber. and he brake them from off his
arms like a thread.

16:13 and delilah said unto samson, hitherto thou hast mocked me, and
told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. and he said
unto her, if thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.

16:14 and she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, the
philistines be upon thee, samson. and he awaked out of his sleep, and
went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.

16:15 and she said unto him, how canst thou say, i love thee, when
thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and
hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.

16:16 and it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words,
and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death; 16:17 that he
told her all his heart, and said unto her, there hath not come a razor
upon mine head; for i have been a nazarite unto god from my mother's
womb: if i be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and i shall
become weak, and be like any other man.

16:18 and when delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she
sent and called for the lords of the philistines, saying, come up this
once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. then the lords of the
philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.

16:19 and she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man,
and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she
began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.

16:20 and she said, the philistines be upon thee, samson. and he awoke
out of his sleep, and said, i will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. and he wist not that the lord was departed from him.

16:21 but the philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought
him down to gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house.

16:22 howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven.

16:23 then the lords of the philistines gathered them together for to
offer a great sacrifice unto dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, our god hath delivered samson our enemy into our hand.

16:24 and when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they
said, our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.

16:25 and it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, call for samson, that he may make us sport. and they called for
samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between the pillars.

16:26 and samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, suffer
me that i may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that i
may lean upon them.

16:27 now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of
the philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while samson made sport.

16:28 and samson called unto the lord, and said, o lord god, remember
me, i pray thee, and strengthen me, i pray thee, only this once, o
god, that i may be at once avenged of the philistines for my two eyes.

16:29 and samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left.

16:30 and samson said, let me die with the philistines. and he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. so the dead which he slew at
his death were more than they which he slew in his life.

16:31 then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buried him between zorah and eshtaol
in the buryingplace of manoah his father. and he judged israel twenty
years.

17:1 and there was a man of mount ephraim, whose name was micah.

17:2 and he said unto his mother, the eleven hundred shekels of silver
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; i took it. and his
mother said, blessed be thou of the lord, my son.

17:3 and when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to
his mother, his mother said, i had wholly dedicated the silver unto
the lord from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten
image: now therefore i will restore it unto thee.

17:4 yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took
two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house
of micah.

17:5 and the man micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and
teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.

17:6 in those days there was no king in israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.

17:7 and there was a young man out of bethlehemjudah of the family of
judah, who was a levite, and he sojourned there.

17:8 and the man departed out of the city from bethlehemjudah to
sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount ephraim to
the house of micah, as he journeyed.

17:9 and micah said unto him, whence comest thou? and he said unto
him, i am a levite of bethlehemjudah, and i go to sojourn where i may
find a place.

17:10 and micah said unto him, dwell with me, and be unto me a father
and a priest, and i will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year,
and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. so the levite went in.

17:11 and the levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young
man was unto him as one of his sons.

17:12 and micah consecrated the levite; and the young man became his
priest, and was in the house of micah.

17:13 then said micah, now know i that the lord will do me good,
seeing i have a levite to my priest.

18:1 in those days there was no king in israel: and in those days the
tribe of the danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto
that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the
tribes of israel.

18:2 and the children of dan sent of their family five men from their
coasts, men of valour, from zorah, and from eshtaol, to spy out the
land, and to search it; and they said unto them, go, search the land:
who when they came to mount ephraim, to the house of micah, they
lodged there.

18:3 when they were by the house of micah, they knew the voice of the
young man the levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him,
who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what
hast thou here?  18:4 and he said unto them, thus and thus dealeth
micah with me, and hath hired me, and i am his priest.

18:5 and they said unto him, ask counsel, we pray thee, of god, that
we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.

18:6 and the priest said unto them, go in peace: before the lord is
your way wherein ye go.

18:7 then the five men departed, and came to laish, and saw the people
that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land,
that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the
zidonians, and had no business with any man.

18:8 and they came unto their brethren to zorah and eshtaol: and their
brethren said unto them, what say ye?  18:9 and they said, arise, that
we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it
is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to
possess the land.

18:10 when ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large
land: for god hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no
want of any thing that is in the earth.

18:11 and there went from thence of the family of the danites, out of
zorah and out of eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of
war.

18:12 and they went up, and pitched in kirjathjearim, in judah:
wherefore they called that place mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it
is behind kirjathjearim.

18:13 and they passed thence unto mount ephraim, and came unto the
house of micah.

18:14 then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of
laish, and said unto their brethren, do ye know that there is in these
houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image?
now therefore consider what ye have to do.

18:15 and they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young
man the levite, even unto the house of micah, and saluted him.

18:16 and the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war,
which were of the children of dan, stood by the entering of the gate.

18:17 and the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came
in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the
teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering
of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons
of war.

18:18 and these went into micah's house, and fetched the carved image,
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. then said the
priest unto them, what do ye?  18:19 and they said unto him, hold thy
peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a
father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the
house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family
in israel?  18:20 and the priest's heart was glad, and he took the
ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst
of the people.

18:21 so they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the
cattle and the carriage before them.

18:22 and when they were a good way from the house of micah, the men
that were in the houses near to micah's house were gathered together,
and overtook the children of dan.

18:23 and they cried unto the children of dan. and they turned their
faces, and said unto micah, what aileth thee, that thou comest with
such a company?  18:24 and he said, ye have taken away my gods which i
made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have i more? and
what is this that ye say unto me, what aileth thee?  18:25 and the
children of dan said unto him, let not thy voice be heard among us,
lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the
lives of thy household.

18:26 and the children of dan went their way: and when micah saw that
they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

18:27 and they took the things which micah had made, and the priest
which he had, and came unto laish, unto a people that were at quiet
and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt
the city with fire.

18:28 and there was no deliverer, because it was far from zidon, and
they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth
by bethrehob. and they built a city, and dwelt therein.

18:29 and they called the name of the city dan, after the name of dan
their father, who was born unto israel: howbeit the name of the city
was laish at the first.

18:30 and the children of dan set up the graven image: and jonathan,
the son of gershom, the son of manasseh, he and his sons were priests
to the tribe of dan until the day of the captivity of the land.

18:31 and they set them up micah's graven image, which he made, all
the time that the house of god was in shiloh.

19:1 and it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in
israel, that there was a certain levite sojourning on the side of
mount ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of bethlehemjudah.

19:2 and his concubine played the whore against him, and went away
from him unto her father's house to bethlehemjudah, and was there four
whole months.

19:3 and her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto
her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple
of asses: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the
father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.

19:4 and his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he
abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged
there.

19:5 and it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in
the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said
unto his son in law, comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and
afterward go your way.

19:6 and they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together:
for the damsel's father had said unto the man, be content, i pray
thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.

19:7 and when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him:
therefore he lodged there again.

19:8 and he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and
the damsel's father said, comfort thine heart, i pray thee. and they
tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.

19:9 and when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and
his servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him,
behold, now the day draweth toward evening, i pray you tarry all
night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart
may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou
mayest go home.

19:10 but the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and
departed, and came over against jebus, which is jerusalem; and there
were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.

19:11 and when they were by jebus, the day was far spent; and the
servant said unto his master, come, i pray thee, and let us turn in
into this city of the jebusites, and lodge in it.

19:12 and his master said unto him, we will not turn aside hither into
the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of israel; we will
pass over to gibeah.

19:13 and he said unto his servant, come, and let us draw near to one
of these places to lodge all night, in gibeah, or in ramah.

19:14 and they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down
upon them when they were by gibeah, which belongeth to benjamin.

19:15 and they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in gibeah:
and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for
there was no man that took them into his house to lodging.

19:16 and, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the
field at even, which was also of mount ephraim; and he sojourned in
gibeah: but the men of the place were benjamites.

19:17 and when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in
the street of the city: and the old man said, whither goest thou? and
whence comest thou?  19:18 and he said unto him, we are passing from
bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount ephraim; from thence am i: and
i went to bethlehemjudah, but i am now going to the house of the lord;
and there is no man that receiveth me to house.

19:19 yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there
is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young
man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.

19:20 and the old man said, peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy
wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.

19:21 so he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the
asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.

19:22 now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of
the city, certain sons of belial, beset the house round about, and
beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man,
saying, bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may
know him.

19:23 and the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and
said unto them, nay, my brethren, nay, i pray you, do not so wickedly;
seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.

19:24 behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them i
will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth
good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.

19:25 but the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his
concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and
abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to
spring, they let her go.

19:26 then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at
the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.

19:27 and her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the
house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his
concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were
upon the threshold.

19:28 and he said unto her, up, and let us be going. but none
answered.

then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him
unto his place.

19:29 and when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid
hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into
twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of israel.

19:30 and it was so, that all that saw it said, there was no such deed
done nor seen from the day that the children of israel came up out of
the land of egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and
speak your minds.

20:1 then all the children of israel went out, and the congregation
was gathered together as one man, from dan even to beersheba, with the
land of gilead, unto the lord in mizpeh.

20:2 and the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of
israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of god,
four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.

20:3 (now the children of benjamin heard that the children of israel
were gone up to mizpeh.) then said the children of israel, tell us,
how was this wickedness?  20:4 and the levite, the husband of the
woman that was slain, answered and said, i came into gibeah that
belongeth to benjamin, i and my concubine, to lodge.

20:5 and the men of gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine
have they forced, that she is dead.

20:6 and i took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
throughout all the country of the inheritance of israel: for they have
committed lewdness and folly in israel.

20:7 behold, ye are all children of israel; give here your advice and
counsel.

20:8 and all the people arose as one man, saying, we will not any of
us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.

20:9 but now this shall be the thing which we will do to gibeah; we
will go up by lot against it; 20:10 and we will take ten men of an
hundred throughout all the tribes of israel, and an hundred of a
thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the
people, that they may do, when they come to gibeah of benjamin,
according to all the folly that they have wrought in israel.

20:11 so all the men of israel were gathered against the city, knit
together as one man.

20:12 and the tribes of israel sent men through all the tribe of
benjamin, saying, what wickedness is this that is done among you?
20:13 now therefore deliver us the men, the children of belial, which
are in gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from
israel. but the children of benjamin would not hearken to the voice of
their brethren the children of israel.

20:14 but the children of benjamin gathered themselves together out of
the cities unto gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of
israel.

20:15 and the children of benjamin were numbered at that time out of
the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the
inhabitants of gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.

20:16 among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not
miss.

20:17 and the men of israel, beside benjamin, were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.

20:18 and the children of israel arose, and went up to the house of
god, and asked counsel of god, and said, which of us shall go up first
to the battle against the children of benjamin? and the lord said,
judah shall go up first.

20:19 and the children of israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
against gibeah.

20:20 and the men of israel went out to battle against benjamin; and
the men of israel put themselves in array to fight against them at
gibeah.

20:21 and the children of benjamin came forth out of gibeah, and
destroyed down to the ground of the israelites that day twenty and two
thousand men.

20:22 and the people the men of israel encouraged themselves, and set
their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in
array the first day.

20:23 (and the children of israel went up and wept before the lord
until even, and asked counsel of the lord, saying, shall i go up again
to battle against the children of benjamin my brother? and the lord
said, go up against him.)  20:24 and the children of israel came near
against the children of benjamin the second day.

20:25 and benjamin went forth against them out of gibeah the second
day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.

20:26 then all the children of israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the house of god, and wept, and sat there before the
lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the lord.

20:27 and the children of israel enquired of the lord, (for the ark of
the covenant of god was there in those days, 20:28 and phinehas, the
son of eleazar, the son of aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, shall i yet again go out to battle against the children of
benjamin my brother, or shall i cease? and the lord said, go up; for
to morrow i will deliver them into thine hand.

20:29 and israel set liers in wait round about gibeah.

20:30 and the children of israel went up against the children of
benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against gibeah,
as at other times.

20:31 and the children of benjamin went out against the people, and
were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people,
and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to
the house of god, and the other to gibeah in the field, about thirty
men of israel.

20:32 and the children of benjamin said, they are smitten down before
us, as at the first. but the children of israel said, let us flee, and
draw them from the city unto the highways.

20:33 and all the men of israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselves in array at baaltamar: and the liers in wait of israel came
forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of gibeah.

20:34 and there came against gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near
them.

20:35 and the lord smote benjamin before israel: and the children of
israel destroyed of the benjamites that day twenty and five thousand
and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.

20:36 so the children of benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the
men of israel gave place to the benjamites, because they trusted unto
the liers in wait which they had set beside gibeah.

20:37 and the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon gibeah; and the
liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the
edge of the sword.

20:38 now there was an appointed sign between the men of israel and
the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise
up out of the city.

20:39 and when the men of israel retired in the battle, benjamin began
to smite and kill of the men of israel about thirty persons: for they
said, surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.

20:40 but when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a
pillar of smoke, the benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the
flame of the city ascended up to heaven.

20:41 and when the men of israel turned again, the men of benjamin
were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.

20:42 therefore they turned their backs before the men of israel unto
the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them
which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.

20:43 thus they inclosed the benjamites round about, and chased them,
and trode them down with ease over against gibeah toward the
sunrising.

20:44 and there fell of benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were
men of valour.

20:45 and they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of
rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men;
and pursued hard after them unto gidom, and slew two thousand men of
them.

20:46 so that all which fell that day of benjamin were twenty and five
thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.

20:47 but six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the
rock rimmon, and abode in the rock rimmon four months.

20:48 and the men of israel turned again upon the children of
benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men
of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set
on fire all the cities that they came to.

21:1 now the men of israel had sworn in mizpeh, saying, there shall
not any of us give his daughter unto benjamin to wife.

21:2 and the people came to the house of god, and abode there till
even before god, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 21:3 and
said, o lord god of israel, why is this come to pass in israel, that
there should be to day one tribe lacking in israel?  21:4 and it came
to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an
altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.

21:5 and the children of israel said, who is there among all the
tribes of israel that came not up with the congregation unto the lord?
for they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the
lord to mizpeh, saying, he shall surely be put to death.

21:6 and the children of israel repented them for benjamin their
brother, and said, there is one tribe cut off from israel this day.

21:7 how shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have
sworn by the lord that we will not give them of our daughters to
wives?  21:8 and they said, what one is there of the tribes of israel
that came not up to mizpeh to the lord? and, behold, there came none
to the camp from jabeshgilead to the assembly.

21:9 for the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the
inhabitants of jabeshgilead there.

21:10 and the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the
valiantest, and commanded them, saying, go and smite the inhabitants
of jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the
children.

21:11 and this is the thing that ye shall do, ye shall utterly destroy
every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.

21:12 and they found among the inhabitants of jabeshgilead four
hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male:
and they brought them unto the camp to shiloh, which is in the land of
canaan.

21:13 and the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of
benjamin that were in the rock rimmon, and to call peaceably unto
them.

21:14 and benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives
which they had saved alive of the women of jabeshgilead: and yet so
they sufficed them not.

21:15 and the people repented them for benjamin, because that the lord
had made a breach in the tribes of israel.

21:16 then the elders of the congregation said, how shall we do for
wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of
benjamin?  21:17 and they said, there must be an inheritance for them
that be escaped of benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of
israel.

21:18 howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the
children of israel have sworn, saying, cursed be he that giveth a wife
to benjamin.

21:19 then they said, behold, there is a feast of the lord in shiloh
yearly in a place which is on the north side of bethel, on the east
side of the highway that goeth up from bethel to shechem, and on the
south of lebonah.

21:20 therefore they commanded the children of benjamin, saying, go
and lie in wait in the vineyards; 21:21 and see, and, behold, if the
daughters of shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of
the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of
shiloh, and go to the land of benjamin.

21:22 and it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto
us to complain, that we will say unto them, be favourable unto them
for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the
war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be
guilty.

21:23 and the children of benjamin did so, and took them wives,
according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and
they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the
cities, and dwelt in them.

21:24 and the children of israel departed thence at that time, every
man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence
every man to his inheritance.

21:25 in those days there was no king in israel: every man did that
which was right in his own eyes.




the book of ruth


1:1 now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there
was a famine in the land. and a certain man of bethlehemjudah went to
sojourn in the country of moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.

1:2 and the name of the man was elimelech, and the name of his wife
naomi, and the name of his two sons mahlon and chilion, ephrathites of
bethlehemjudah. and they came into the country of moab, and continued
there.

1:3 and elimelech naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two
sons.

1:4 and they took them wives of the women of moab; the name of the one
was orpah, and the name of the other ruth: and they dwelled there
about ten years.

1:5 and mahlon and chilion died also both of them; and the woman was
left of her two sons and her husband.

1:6 then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return
from the country of moab: for she had heard in the country of moab how
that the lord had visited his people in giving them bread.

1:7 wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her
two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto
the land of judah.

1:8 and naomi said unto her two daughters in law, go, return each to
her mother's house: the lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt
with the dead, and with me.

1:9 the lord grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house
of her husband. then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice,
and wept.

1:10 and they said unto her, surely we will return with thee unto thy
people.

1:11 and naomi said, turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me?
are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your
husbands?  1:12 turn again, my daughters, go your way; for i am too
old to have an husband. if i should say, i have hope, if i should have
an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 1:13 would ye
tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from
having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your
sakes that the hand of the lord is gone out against me.

1:14 and they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and orpah kissed
her mother in law; but ruth clave unto her.

1:15 and she said, behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.

1:16 and ruth said, intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou goest, i will go; and where
thou lodgest, i will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy god
my god: 1:17 where thou diest, will i die, and there will i be buried:
the lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me.

1:18 when she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then
she left speaking unto her.

1:19 so they two went until they came to bethlehem. and it came to
pass, when they were come to bethlehem, that all the city was moved
about them, and they said, is this naomi?  1:20 and she said unto
them, call me not naomi, call me mara: for the almighty hath dealt
very bitterly with me.

1:21 i went out full and the lord hath brought me home again empty:
why then call ye me naomi, seeing the lord hath testified against me,
and the almighty hath afflicted me?  1:22 so naomi returned, and ruth
the moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of
the country of moab: and they came to bethlehem in the beginning of
barley harvest.

2:1 and naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth,
of the family of elimelech; and his name was boaz.

2:2 and ruth the moabitess said unto naomi, let me now go to the
field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight i shall find
grace.

and she said unto her, go, my daughter.

2:3 and she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the
reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging
unto boaz, who was of the kindred of elimelech.

2:4 and, behold, boaz came from bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
the lord be with you. and they answered him, the lord bless thee.

2:5 then said boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers,
whose damsel is this?  2:6 and the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said, it is the moabitish damsel that came back
with naomi out of the country of moab: 2:7 and she said, i pray you,
let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she
came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she
tarried a little in the house.

2:8 then said boaz unto ruth, hearest thou not, my daughter? go not to
glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by
my maidens: 2:9 let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and
go thou after them: have i not charged the young men that they shall
not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and
drink of that which the young men have drawn.

2:10 then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and
said unto him, why have i found grace in thine eyes, that thou
shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing i am a stranger?  2:11 and boaz
answered and said unto her, it hath fully been shewed me, all that
thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the
land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest
not heretofore.

2:12 the lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of
the lord god of israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

2:13 then she said, let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that
thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto
thine handmaid, though i be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.

2:14 and boaz said unto her, at mealtime come thou hither, and eat of
the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. and she sat beside the
reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was
sufficed, and left.

2:15 and when she was risen up to glean, boaz commanded his young men,
saying, let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
2:16 and let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and
leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.

2:17 so she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.

2:18 and she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law
saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that
she had reserved after she was sufficed.

2:19 and her mother in law said unto her, where hast thou gleaned to
day?  and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge
of thee. and she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought,
and said, the man's name with whom i wrought to day is boaz.

2:20 and naomi said unto her daughter in law, blessed be he of the
lord, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the
dead. and naomi said unto her, the man is near of kin unto us, one of
our next kinsmen.

2:21 and ruth the moabitess said, he said unto me also, thou shalt
keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.

2:22 and naomi said unto ruth her daughter in law, it is good, my
daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not
in any other field.

2:23 so she kept fast by the maidens of boaz to glean unto the end of
barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.

3:1 then naomi her mother in law said unto her, my daughter, shall i
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?  3:2 and now is
not boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast?  behold, he
winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.

3:3 wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto
the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.

3:4 and it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the
place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet,
and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.

3:5 and she said unto her, all that thou sayest unto me i will do.

3:6 and she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that
her mother in law bade her.

3:7 and when boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he
went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly,
and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.

3:8 and it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and
turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.

3:9 and he said, who art thou? and she answered, i am ruth thine
handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art
a near kinsman.

3:10 and he said, blessed be thou of the lord, my daughter: for thou
hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning,
inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

3:11 and now, my daughter, fear not; i will do to thee all that thou
requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a
virtuous woman.

3:12 and now it is true that i am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a
kinsman nearer than i.

3:13 tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the
kinsman's part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee,
then will i do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the lord liveth: lie
down until the morning.

3:14 and she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before
one could know another. and he said, let it not be known that a woman
came into the floor.

3:15 also he said, bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold
it.

and when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it
on her: and she went into the city.

3:16 and when she came to her mother in law, she said, who art thou,
my daughter? and she told her all that the man had done to her.

3:17 and she said, these six measures of barley gave he me; for he
said to me, go not empty unto thy mother in law.

3:18 then said she, sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have
finished the thing this day.

4:1 then went boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and,
behold, the kinsman of whom boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, ho,
such a one! turn aside, sit down here. and he turned aside, and sat
down.

4:2 and he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, sit ye
down here. and they sat down.

4:3 and he said unto the kinsman, naomi, that is come again out of the
country of moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother
elimelech's: 4:4 and i thought to advertise thee, saying, buy it
before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. if thou
wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell
me, that i may know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and i
am after thee. and he said, i will redeem it.

4:5 then said boaz, what day thou buyest the field of the hand of
naomi, thou must buy it also of ruth the moabitess, the wife of the
dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.

4:6 and the kinsman said, i cannot redeem it for myself, lest i mar
mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for i cannot
redeem it.

4:7 now this was the manner in former time in israel concerning
redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man
plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a
testimony in israel.

4:8 therefore the kinsman said unto boaz, buy it for thee. so he drew
off his shoe.

4:9 and boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, ye are
witnesses this day, that i have bought all that was elimelech's, and
all that was chilion's and mahlon's, of the hand of naomi.

4:10 moreover ruth the moabitess, the wife of mahlon, have i purchased
to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance,
that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and
from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day.

4:11 and all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said,
we are witnesses. the lord make the woman that is come into thine
house like rachel and like leah, which two did build the house of
israel: and do thou worthily in ephratah, and be famous in bethlehem:
4:12 and let thy house be like the house of pharez, whom tamar bare
unto judah, of the seed which the lord shall give thee of this young
woman.

4:13 so boaz took ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto
her, the lord gave her conception, and she bare a son.

4:14 and the women said unto naomi, blessed be the lord, which hath
not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous
in israel.

4:15 and he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher
of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.

4:16 and naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurse unto it.

4:17 and the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, there is a
son born to naomi; and they called his name obed: he is the father of
jesse, the father of david.

4:18 now these are the generations of pharez: pharez begat hezron,
4:19 and hezron begat ram, and ram begat amminadab, 4:20 and amminadab
begat nahshon, and nahshon begat salmon, 4:21 and salmon begat boaz,
and boaz begat obed, 4:22 and obed begat jesse, and jesse begat david.




the first book of samuel

otherwise called:

the first book of the kings


1:1 now there was a certain man of ramathaimzophim, of mount ephraim,
and his name was elkanah, the son of jeroham, the son of elihu, the
son of tohu, the son of zuph, an ephrathite: 1:2 and he had two wives;
the name of the one was hannah, and the name of the other peninnah:
and peninnah had children, but hannah had no children.

1:3 and this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the lord of hosts in shiloh. and the two sons of eli,
hophni and phinehas, the priests of the lord, were there.

1:4 and when the time was that elkanah offered, he gave to peninnah
his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions: 1:5 but
unto hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved hannah: but the
lord had shut up her womb.

1:6 and her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret,
because the lord had shut up her womb.

1:7 and as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of
the lord, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.

1:8 then said elkanah her husband to her, hannah, why weepest thou?
and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not i better
to thee than ten sons?  1:9 so hannah rose up after they had eaten in
shiloh, and after they had drunk. now eli the priest sat upon a seat
by a post of the temple of the lord.

1:10 and she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the lord, and
wept sore.

1:11 and she vowed a vow, and said, o lord of hosts, if thou wilt
indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and
not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man
child, then i will give him unto the lord all the days of his life,
and there shall no razor come upon his head.

1:12 and it came to pass, as she continued praying before the lord,
that eli marked her mouth.

1:13 now hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard: therefore eli thought she had been drunken.

1:14 and eli said unto her, how long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thy wine from thee.

1:15 and hannah answered and said, no, my lord, i am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit: i have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
poured out my soul before the lord.

1:16 count not thine handmaid for a daughter of belial: for out of the
abundance of my complaint and grief have i spoken hitherto.

1:17 then eli answered and said, go in peace: and the god of israel
grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.

1:18 and she said, let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. so the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

1:19 and they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
lord, and returned, and came to their house to ramah: and elkanah knew
hannah his wife; and the lord remembered her.

1:20 wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after
hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name samuel,
saying, because i have asked him of the lord.

1:21 and the man elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
lord the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

1:22 but hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, i will not
go up until the child be weaned, and then i will bring him, that he
may appear before the lord, and there abide for ever.

1:23 and elkanah her husband said unto her, do what seemeth thee good;
tarry until thou have weaned him; only the lord establish his word. so
the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.

1:24 and when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three
bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought
him unto the house of the lord in shiloh: and the child was young.

1:25 and they slew a bullock, and brought the child to eli.

1:26 and she said, oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, i am the
woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the lord.

1:27 for this child i prayed; and the lord hath given me my petition
which i asked of him: 1:28 therefore also i have lent him to the lord;
as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the lord. and he worshipped
the lord there.

2:1 and hannah prayed, and said, my heart rejoiceth in the lord, mine
horn is exalted in the lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies;
because i rejoice in thy salvation.

2:2 there is none holy as the lord: for there is none beside thee:
neither is there any rock like our god.

2:3 talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of
your mouth: for the lord is a god of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed.

2:4 the bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
girded with strength.

2:5 they that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they
that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
that hath many children is waxed feeble.

2:6 the lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave,
and bringeth up.

2:7 the lord maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and
lifteth up.

2:8 he raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit
the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the lord's, and
he hath set the world upon them.

2:9 he will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be
silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.

2:10 the adversaries of the lord shall be broken to pieces; out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the lord shall judge the ends of
the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the
horn of his anointed.

2:11 and elkanah went to ramah to his house. and the child did
minister unto the lord before eli the priest.

2:12 now the sons of eli were sons of belial; they knew not the lord.

2:13 and the priest's custom with the people was, that, when any man
offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in
seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand; 2:14 and he
struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the
fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. so they did in
shiloh unto all the israelites that came thither.

2:15 also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and
said to the man that sacrificed, give flesh to roast for the priest;
for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.

2:16 and if any man said unto him, let them not fail to burn the fat
presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would
answer him, nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, i will
take it by force.

2:17 wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the
lord: for men abhorred the offering of the lord.

2:18 but samuel ministered before the lord, being a child, girded with
a linen ephod.

2:19 moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
yearly sacrifice.

2:20 and eli blessed elkanah and his wife, and said, the lord give
thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the lord. and
they went unto their own home.

2:21 and the lord visited hannah, so that she conceived, and bare
three sons and two daughters. and the child samuel grew before the
lord.

2:22 now eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

2:23 and he said unto them, why do ye such things? for i hear of your
evil dealings by all this people.

2:24 nay, my sons; for it is no good report that i hear: ye make the
lord's people to transgress.

2:25 if one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if
a man sin against the lord, who shall intreat for him? notwithstanding
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the lord
would slay them.

2:26 and the child samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the
lord, and also with men.

2:27 and there came a man of god unto eli, and said unto him, thus
saith the lord, did i plainly appear unto the house of thy father,
when they were in egypt in pharaoh's house?  2:28 and did i choose him
out of all the tribes of israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did i give
unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the
children of israel?  2:29 wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at
mine offering, which i have commanded in my habitation; and honourest
thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the
offerings of israel my people?  2:30 wherefore the lord god of israel
saith, i said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father,
should walk before me for ever: but now the lord saith, be it far from
me; for them that honour me i will honour, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed.

2:31 behold, the days come, that i will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine
house.

2:32 and thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
which god shall give israel: and there shall not be an old man in
thine house for ever.

2:33 and the man of thine, whom i shall not cut off from mine altar,
shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the
increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.

2:34 and this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two
sons, on hophni and phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.

2:35 and i will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and i will build him a
sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.

2:36 and it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, put me, i pray thee, into one of the priests'
offices, that i may eat a piece of bread.

3:1 and the child samuel ministered unto the lord before eli. and the
word of the lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.

3:2 and it came to pass at that time, when eli was laid down in his
place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 and
ere the lamp of god went out in the temple of the lord, where the ark
of god was, and samuel was laid down to sleep; 3:4 that the lord
called samuel: and he answered, here am i.

3:5 and he ran unto eli, and said, here am i; for thou calledst me.
and he said, i called not; lie down again. and he went and lay down.

3:6 and the lord called yet again, samuel. and samuel arose and went
to eli, and said, here am i; for thou didst call me. and he answered,
i called not, my son; lie down again.

3:7 now samuel did not yet know the lord, neither was the word of the
lord yet revealed unto him.

3:8 and the lord called samuel again the third time. and he arose and
went to eli, and said, here am i; for thou didst call me. and eli
perceived that the lord had called the child.

3:9 therefore eli said unto samuel, go, lie down: and it shall be, if
he call thee, that thou shalt say, speak, lord; for thy servant
heareth. so samuel went and lay down in his place.

3:10 and the lord came, and stood, and called as at other times,
samuel, samuel. then samuel answered, speak; for thy servant heareth.

3:11 and the lord said to samuel, behold, i will do a thing in israel,
at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.

3:12 in that day i will perform against eli all things which i have
spoken concerning his house: when i begin, i will also make an end.

3:13 for i have told him that i will judge his house for ever for the
iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not.

3:14 and therefore i have sworn unto the house of eli, that the
iniquity of eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever.

3:15 and samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the lord. and samuel feared to shew eli the vision.

3:16 then eli called samuel, and said, samuel, my son. and he
answered, here am i.

3:17 and he said, what is the thing that the lord hath said unto thee?
i pray thee hide it not from me: god do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.

3:18 and samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. and he
said, it is the lord: let him do what seemeth him good.

3:19 and samuel grew, and the lord was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground.

3:20 and all israel from dan even to beersheba knew that samuel was
established to be a prophet of the lord.

3:21 and the lord appeared again in shiloh: for the lord revealed
himself to samuel in shiloh by the word of the lord.

4:1 and the word of samuel came to all israel. now israel went out
against the philistines to battle, and pitched beside ebenezer: and
the philistines pitched in aphek.

4:2 and the philistines put themselves in array against israel: and
when they joined battle, israel was smitten before the philistines:
and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.

4:3 and when the people were come into the camp, the elders of israel
said, wherefore hath the lord smitten us to day before the
philistines? let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the lord out of
shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of
the hand of our enemies.

4:4 so the people sent to shiloh, that they might bring from thence
the ark of the covenant of the lord of hosts, which dwelleth between
the cherubims: and the two sons of eli, hophni and phinehas, were
there with the ark of the covenant of god.

4:5 and when the ark of the covenant of the lord came into the camp,
all israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.

4:6 and when the philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said,
what meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the hebrews?
and they understood that the ark of the lord was come into the camp.

4:7 and the philistines were afraid, for they said, god is come into
the camp. and they said, woe unto us! for there hath not been such a
thing heretofore.

4:8 woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty
gods? these are the gods that smote the egyptians with all the plagues
in the wilderness.

4:9 be strong and quit yourselves like men, o ye philistines, that ye
be not servants unto the hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
yourselves like men, and fight.

4:10 and the philistines fought, and israel was smitten, and they fled
every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for
there fell of israel thirty thousand footmen.

4:11 and the ark of god was taken; and the two sons of eli, hophni and
phinehas, were slain.

4:12 and there ran a man of benjamin out of the army, and came to
shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his
head.

4:13 and when he came, lo, eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of god. and when the man
came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.

4:14 and when eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, what meaneth
the noise of this tumult? and the man came in hastily, and told eli.

4:15 now eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim,
that he could not see.

4:16 and the man said unto eli, i am he that came out of the army, and
i fled to day out of the army. and he said, what is there done, my
son?  4:17 and the messenger answered and said, israel is fled before
the philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
people, and thy two sons also, hophni and phinehas, are dead, and the
ark of god is taken.

4:18 and it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of god, that
he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his
neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. and he had
judged israel forty years.

4:19 and his daughter in law, phinehas' wife, was with child, near to
be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of god was
taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.

4:20 and about the time of her death the women that stood by her said
unto her, fear not; for thou hast born a son. but she answered not,
neither did she regard it.

4:21 and she named the child ichabod, saying, the glory is departed
from israel: because the ark of god was taken, and because of her
father in law and her husband.

4:22 and she said, the glory is departed from israel: for the ark of
god is taken.

5:1 and the philistines took the ark of god, and brought it from
ebenezer unto ashdod.

5:2 when the philistines took the ark of god, they brought it into the
house of dagon, and set it by dagon.

5:3 and when they of ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, dagon
was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the lord. and
they took dagon, and set him in his place again.

5:4 and when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, dagon was
fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the lord; and the
head of dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold; only the stump of dagon was left to him.

5:5 therefore neither the priests of dagon, nor any that come into
dagon's house, tread on the threshold of dagon in ashdod unto this
day.

5:6 but the hand of the lord was heavy upon them of ashdod, and he
destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even ashdod and the
coasts thereof.

5:7 and when the men of ashdod saw that it was so, they said, the ark
of the god of israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore
upon us, and upon dagon our god.

5:8 they sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the philistines
unto them, and said, what shall we do with the ark of the god of
israel? and they answered, let the ark of the god of israel be carried
about unto gath. and they carried the ark of the god of israel about
thither.

5:9 and it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of
the lord was against the city with a very great destruction: and he
smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods
in their secret parts.

5:10 therefore they sent the ark of god to ekron. and it came to pass,
as the ark of god came to ekron, that the ekronites cried out, saying,
they have brought about the ark of the god of israel to us, to slay us
and our people.

5:11 so they sent and gathered together all the lords of the
philistines, and said, send away the ark of the god of israel, and let
it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for
there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of
god was very heavy there.

5:12 and the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the
cry of the city went up to heaven.

6:1 and the ark of the lord was in the country of the philistines
seven months.

6:2 and the philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying, what shall we do to the ark of the lord? tell us wherewith we
shall send it to his place.

6:3 and they said, if ye send away the ark of the god of israel, send
it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not
removed from you.

6:4 then said they, what shall be the trespass offering which we shall
return to him? they answered, five golden emerods, and five golden
mice, according to the number of the lords of the philistines: for one
plague was on you all, and on your lords.

6:5 wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your
mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the god of
israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from
off your gods, and from off your land.

6:6 wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the egyptians and
pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among
them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?  6:7 now
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there
hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
calves home from them: 6:8 and take the ark of the lord, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away,
that it may go.

6:9 and see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to
bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we
shall know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that
happened to us.

6:10 and the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the
cart, and shut up their calves at home: 6:11 and they laid the ark of
the lord upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the
images of their emerods.

6:12 and the kine took the straight way to the way of bethshemesh, and
went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the philistines went
after them unto the border of bethshemesh.

6:13 and they of bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the
valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced
to see it.

6:14 and the cart came into the field of joshua, a bethshemite, and
stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of
the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the lord.

6:15 and the levites took down the ark of the lord, and the coffer
that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the
great stone: and the men of bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the lord.

6:16 and when the five lords of the philistines had seen it, they
returned to ekron the same day.

6:17 and these are the golden emerods which the philistines returned
for a trespass offering unto the lord; for ashdod one, for gaza one,
for askelon one, for gath one, for ekron one; 6:18 and the golden
mice, according to the number of all the cities of the philistines
belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country
villages, even unto the great stone of abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the lord: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of
joshua, the bethshemite.

6:19 and he smote the men of bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the ark of the lord, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the lord had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.

6:20 and the men of bethshemesh said, who is able to stand before this
holy lord god? and to whom shall he go up from us?  6:21 and they sent
messengers to the inhabitants of kirjathjearim, saying, the
philistines have brought again the ark of the lord; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you.

7:1 and the men of kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the
lord, and brought it into the house of abinadab in the hill, and
sanctified eleazar his son to keep the ark of the lord.

7:2 and it came to pass, while the ark abode in kirjathjearim, that
the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of
israel lamented after the lord.

7:3 and samuel spake unto all the house of israel, saying, if ye do
return unto the lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange
gods and ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
the philistines.

7:4 then the children of israel did put away baalim and ashtaroth, and
served the lord only.

7:5 and samuel said, gather all israel to mizpeh, and i will pray for
you unto the lord.

7:6 and they gathered together to mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out before the lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, we
have sinned against the lord. and samuel judged the children of israel
in mizpeh.

7:7 and when the philistines heard that the children of israel were
gathered together to mizpeh, the lords of the philistines went up
against israel. and when the children of israel heard it, they were
afraid of the philistines.

7:8 and the children of israel said to samuel, cease not to cry unto
the lord our god for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
philistines.

7:9 and samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the lord: and samuel cried unto the lord for
israel; and the lord heard him.

7:10 and as samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the philistines
drew near to battle against israel: but the lord thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the philistines, and discomfited them;
and they were smitten before israel.

7:11 and the men of israel went out of mizpeh, and pursued the
philistines, and smote them, until they came under bethcar.

7:12 then samuel took a stone, and set it between mizpeh and shen, and
called the name of it ebenezer, saying, hitherto hath the lord helped
us.

7:13 so the philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of israel: and the hand of the lord was against the philistines
all the days of samuel.

7:14 and the cities which the philistines had taken from israel were
restored to israel, from ekron even unto gath; and the coasts thereof
did israel deliver out of the hands of the philistines. and there was
peace between israel and the amorites.

7:15 and samuel judged israel all the days of his life.

7:16 and he went from year to year in circuit to bethel, and gilgal,
and mizpeh, and judged israel in all those places.

7:17 and his return was to ramah; for there was his house; and there
he judged israel; and there he built an altar unto the lord.

8:1 and it came to pass, when samuel was old, that he made his sons
judges over israel.

8:2 now the name of his firstborn was joel; and the name of his
second, abiah: they were judges in beersheba.

8:3 and his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
and took bribes, and perverted judgment.

8:4 then all the elders of israel gathered themselves together, and
came to samuel unto ramah, 8:5 and said unto him, behold, thou art
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us
like all the nations.

8:6 but the thing displeased samuel, when they said, give us a king to
judge us. and samuel prayed unto the lord.

8:7 and the lord said unto samuel, hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that i should not reign over them.

8:8 according to all the works which they have done since the day that
i brought them up out of egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.

8:9 now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them.

8:10 and samuel told all the words of the lord unto the people that
asked of him a king.

8:11 and he said, this will be the manner of the king that shall reign
over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
chariots.

8:12 and he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains
over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his
harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his
chariots.

8:13 and he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
cooks, and to be bakers.

8:14 and he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

8:15 and he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards,
and give to his officers, and to his servants.

8:16 and he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.

8:17 he will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his
servants.

8:18 and ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye
shall have chosen you; and the lord will not hear you in that day.

8:19 nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of samuel; and
they said, nay; but we will have a king over us; 8:20 that we also may
be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles.

8:21 and samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the lord.

8:22 and the lord said to samuel, hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. and samuel said unto the men of israel, go ye every man
unto his city.

9:1 now there was a man of benjamin, whose name was kish, the son of
abiel, the son of zeror, the son of bechorath, the son of aphiah, a
benjamite, a mighty man of power.

9:2 and he had a son, whose name was saul, a choice young man, and a
goodly: and there was not among the children of israel a goodlier
person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any
of the people.

9:3 and the asses of kish saul's father were lost. and kish said to
saul his son, take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go
seek the asses.

9:4 and he passed through mount ephraim, and passed through the land
of shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the
land of shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the
land of the benjamites, but they found them not.

9:5 and when they were come to the land of zuph, saul said to his
servant that was with him, come, and let us return; lest my father
leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.

9:6 and he said unto him, behold now, there is in this city a man of
god, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that
we should go.

9:7 then said saul to his servant, but, behold, if we go, what shall
we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is
not a present to bring to the man of god: what have we?  9:8 and the
servant answered saul again, and said, behold, i have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will i give to the man of god,
to tell us our way.

9:9 (beforetime in israel, when a man went to enquire of god, thus he
spake, come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
prophet was beforetime called a seer.)  9:10 then said saul to his
servant, well said; come, let us go. so they went unto the city where
the man of god was.

9:11 and as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, is the seer here?
9:12 and they answered them, and said, he is; behold, he is before
you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 as soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be
bidden. now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find
him.

9:14 and they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place.

9:15 now the lord had told samuel in his ear a day before saul came,
saying, 9:16 to morrow about this time i will send thee a man out of
the land of benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
people israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the
philistines: for i have looked upon my people, because their cry is
come unto me.

9:17 and when samuel saw saul, the lord said unto him, behold the man
whom i spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.

9:18 then saul drew near to samuel in the gate, and said, tell me, i
pray thee, where the seer's house is.

9:19 and samuel answered saul, and said, i am the seer: go up before
me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
i will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.

9:20 and as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. and on whom is all the desire of
israel? is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house?  9:21 and
saul answered and said, am not i a benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of israel? and my family the least of all the families of the
tribe of benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?  9:22 and
samuel took saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirty persons.

9:23 and samuel said unto the cook, bring the portion which i gave
thee, of which i said unto thee, set it by thee.

9:24 and the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,
and set it before saul. and samuel said, behold that which is left!
set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for
thee since i said, i have invited the people. so saul did eat with
samuel that day.

9:25 and when they were come down from the high place into the city,
samuel communed with saul upon the top of the house.

9:26 and they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that samuel called saul to the top of the house, saying, up, that
i may send thee away. and saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and samuel, abroad.

9:27 and as they were going down to the end of the city, samuel said
to saul, bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that i may shew thee the word of god.

10:1 then samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, and said, is it not because the lord hath anointed thee to
be captain over his inheritance?  10:2 when thou art departed from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by rachel's sepulchre in the
border of benjamin at zelzah; and they will say unto thee, the asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left
the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, what shall i do
for my son?  10:3 then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou
shalt come to the plain of tabor, and there shall meet thee three men
going up to god to bethel, one carrying three kids, and another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
10:4 and they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread;
which thou shalt receive of their hands.

10:5 after that thou shalt come to the hill of god, where is the
garrison of the philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art
come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets
coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy: 10:6 and the
spirit of the lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with
them, and shalt be turned into another man.

10:7 and let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do
as occasion serve thee; for god is with thee.

10:8 and thou shalt go down before me to gilgal; and, behold, i will
come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till i
come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.

10:9 and it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
samuel, god gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day.

10:10 and when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the spirit of god came upon him, and he
prophesied among them.

10:11 and it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, what is this that is come unto the son of kish? is saul also
among the prophets?  10:12 and one of the same place answered and
said, but who is their father? therefore it became a proverb, is saul
also among the prophets?  10:13 and when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place.

10:14 and saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, whither went
ye?  and he said, to seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to samuel.

10:15 and saul's uncle said, tell me, i pray thee, what samuel said
unto you.

10:16 and saul said unto his uncle, he told us plainly that the asses
were found. but of the matter of the kingdom, whereof samuel spake, he
told him not.

10:17 and samuel called the people together unto the lord to mizpeh;
10:18 and said unto the children of israel, thus saith the lord god of
israel, i brought up israel out of egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 and ye have this day rejected your god,
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, nay, but set a king over us.
now therefore present yourselves before the lord by your tribes, and
by your thousands.

10:20 and when samuel had caused all the tribes of israel to come
near, the tribe of benjamin was taken.

10:21 when he had caused the tribe of benjamin to come near by their
families, the family of matri was taken, and saul the son of kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.

10:22 therefore they enquired of the lord further, if the man should
yet come thither. and the lord answered, behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff.

10:23 and they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward.

10:24 and samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the lord hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? and all the
people shouted, and said, god save the king.

10:25 then samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the lord. and samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house.

10:26 and saul also went home to gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts god had touched.

10:27 but the children of belial said, how shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought no presents. but he held his peace.

11:1 then nahash the ammonite came up, and encamped against
jabeshgilead: and all the men of jabesh said unto nahash, make a
covenant with us, and we will serve thee.

11:2 and nahash the ammonite answered them, on this condition will i
make a covenant with you, that i may thrust out all your right eyes,
and lay it for a reproach upon all israel.

11:3 and the elders of jabesh said unto him, give us seven days'
respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.

11:4 then came the messengers to gibeah of saul, and told the tidings
in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices,
and wept.

11:5 and, behold, saul came after the herd out of the field; and saul
said, what aileth the people that they weep? and they told him the
tidings of the men of jabesh.

11:6 and the spirit of god came upon saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly.

11:7 and he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, whosoever cometh not forth after saul and after samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. and the fear of the lord fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent.

11:8 and when he numbered them in bezek, the children of israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of judah thirty thousand.

11:9 and they said unto the messengers that came, thus shall ye say
unto the men of jabeshgilead, to morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
ye shall have help. and the messengers came and shewed it to the men
of jabesh; and they were glad.

11:10 therefore the men of jabesh said, to morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.

11:11 and it was so on the morrow, that saul put the people in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together.

11:12 and the people said unto samuel, who is he that said, shall saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.

11:13 and saul said, there shall not a man be put to death this day:
for to day the lord hath wrought salvation in israel.

11:14 then said samuel to the people, come, and let us go to gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there.

11:15 and all the people went to gilgal; and there they made saul king
before the lord in gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace offerings before the lord; and there saul and all the men of
israel rejoiced greatly.

12:1 and samuel said unto all israel, behold, i have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.

12:2 and now, behold, the king walketh before you: and i am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and i have walked
before you from my childhood unto this day.

12:3 behold, here i am: witness against me before the lord, and before
his anointed: whose ox have i taken? or whose ass have i taken? or
whom have i defrauded? whom have i oppressed? or of whose hand have i
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and i will restore it
you.

12:4 and they said, thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand.

12:5 and he said unto them, the lord is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.
and they answered, he is witness.

12:6 and samuel said unto the people, it is the lord that advanced
moses and aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
egypt.

12:7 now therefore stand still, that i may reason with you before the
lord of all the righteous acts of the lord, which he did to you and to
your fathers.

12:8 when jacob was come into egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
lord, then the lord sent moses and aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of egypt, and made them dwell in this place.

12:9 and when they forgat the lord their god, he sold them into the
hand of sisera, captain of the host of hazor, and into the hand of the
philistines, and into the hand of the king of moab, and they fought
against them.

12:10 and they cried unto the lord, and said, we have sinned, because
we have forsaken the lord, and have served baalim and ashtaroth: but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.

12:11 and the lord sent jerubbaal, and bedan, and jephthah, and
samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every
side, and ye dwelled safe.

12:12 and when ye saw that nahash the king of the children of ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the lord your god was your king.

12:13 now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
have desired! and, behold, the lord hath set a king over you.

12:14 if ye will fear the lord, and serve him, and obey his voice, and
not rebel against the commandment of the lord, then shall both ye and
also the king that reigneth over you continue following the lord your
god: 12:15 but if ye will not obey the voice of the lord, but rebel
against the commandment of the lord, then shall the hand of the lord
be against you, as it was against your fathers.

12:16 now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the lord
will do before your eyes.

12:17 is it not wheat harvest to day? i will call unto the lord, and
he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the lord, in
asking you a king.

12:18 so samuel called unto the lord; and the lord sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the lord and samuel.

12:19 and all the people said unto samuel, pray for thy servants unto
the lord thy god, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins
this evil, to ask us a king.

12:20 and samuel said unto the people, fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the lord, but serve the
lord with all your heart; 12:21 and turn ye not aside: for then should
ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are
vain.

12:22 for the lord will not forsake his people for his great name's
sake: because it hath pleased the lord to make you his people.

12:23 moreover as for me, god forbid that i should sin against the
lord in ceasing to pray for you: but i will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 only fear the lord, and serve him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.

12:25 but if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king.

13:1 saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over
israel, 13:2 saul chose him three thousand men of israel; whereof two
thousand were with saul in michmash and in mount bethel, and a
thousand were with jonathan in gibeah of benjamin: and the rest of the
people he sent every man to his tent.

13:3 and jonathan smote the garrison of the philistines that was in
geba, and the philistines heard of it. and saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, let the hebrews hear.

13:4 and all israel heard say that saul had smitten a garrison of the
philistines, and that israel also was had in abomination with the
philistines. and the people were called together after saul to gilgal.

13:5 and the philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
came up, and pitched in michmash, eastward from bethaven.

13:6 when the men of israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.

13:7 and some of the hebrews went over jordan to the land of gad and
gilead. as for saul, he was yet in gilgal, and all the people followed
him trembling.

13:8 and he tarried seven days, according to the set time that samuel
had appointed: but samuel came not to gilgal; and the people were
scattered from him.

13:9 and saul said, bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
offerings. and he offered the burnt offering.

13:10 and it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, samuel came; and saul went out to
meet him, that he might salute him.

13:11 and samuel said, what hast thou done? and saul said, because i
saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the philistines gathered
themselves together at michmash; 13:12 therefore said i, the
philistines will come down now upon me to gilgal, and i have not made
supplication unto the lord: i forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering.

13:13 and samuel said to saul, thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the lord thy god, which he commanded thee: for
now would the lord have established thy kingdom upon israel for ever.

13:14 but now thy kingdom shall not continue: the lord hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the lord hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
lord commanded thee.

13:15 and samuel arose, and gat him up from gilgal unto gibeah of
benjamin. and saul numbered the people that were present with him,
about six hundred men.

13:16 and saul, and jonathan his son, and the people that were present
with them, abode in gibeah of benjamin: but the philistines encamped
in michmash.

13:17 and the spoilers came out of the camp of the philistines in
three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to
ophrah, unto the land of shual: 13:18 and another company turned the
way to bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border
that looketh to the valley of zeboim toward the wilderness.

13:19 now there was no smith found throughout all the land of israel:
for the philistines said, lest the hebrews make them swords or spears:
13:20 but all the israelites went down to the philistines, to sharpen
every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.

13:21 yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and
for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.

13:22 so it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither
sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
saul and jonathan: but with saul and with jonathan his son was there
found.

13:23 and the garrison of the philistines went out to the passage of
michmash.

14:1 now it came to pass upon a day, that jonathan the son of saul
said unto the young man that bare his armour, come, and let us go over
to the philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. but he told
not his father.

14:2 and saul tarried in the uttermost part of gibeah under a
pomegranate tree which is in migron: and the people that were with him
were about six hundred men; 14:3 and ahiah, the son of ahitub,
ichabod's brother, the son of phinehas, the son of eli, the lord's
priest in shiloh, wearing an ephod. and the people knew not that
jonathan was gone.

14:4 and between the passages, by which jonathan sought to go over
unto the philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one
side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was
bozez, and the name of the other seneh.

14:5 the forefront of the one was situate northward over against
michmash, and the other southward over against gibeah.

14:6 and jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, come,
and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be
that the lord will work for us: for there is no restraint to the lord
to save by many or by few.

14:7 and his armourbearer said unto him, do all that is in thine
heart: turn thee; behold, i am with thee according to thy heart.

14:8 then said jonathan, behold, we will pass over unto these men, and
we will discover ourselves unto them.

14:9 if they say thus unto us, tarry until we come to you; then we
will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.

14:10 but if they say thus, come up unto us; then we will go up: for
the lord hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign
unto us.

14:11 and both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the
philistines: and the philistines said, behold, the hebrews come forth
out of the holes where they had hid themselves.

14:12 and the men of the garrison answered jonathan and his
armourbearer, and said, come up to us, and we will shew you a thing.
and jonathan said unto his armourbearer, come up after me: for the
lord hath delivered them into the hand of israel.

14:13 and jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and
his armourbearer after him: and they fell before jonathan; and his
armourbearer slew after him.

14:14 and that first slaughter, which jonathan and his armourbearer
made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land,
which a yoke of oxen might plow.

14:15 and there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all
the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.

14:16 and the watchmen of saul in gibeah of benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one
another.

14:17 then said saul unto the people that were with him, number now,
and see who is gone from us. and when they had numbered, behold,
jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.

14:18 and saul said unto ahiah, bring hither the ark of god. for the
ark of god was at that time with the children of israel.

14:19 and it came to pass, while saul talked unto the priest, that the
noise that was in the host of the philistines went on and increased:
and saul said unto the priest, withdraw thine hand.

14:20 and saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's
sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.

14:21 moreover the hebrews that were with the philistines before that
time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round
about, even they also turned to be with the israelites that were with
saul and jonathan.

14:22 likewise all the men of israel which had hid themselves in mount
ephraim, when they heard that the philistines fled, even they also
followed hard after them in the battle.

14:23 so the lord saved israel that day: and the battle passed over
unto bethaven.

14:24 and the men of israel were distressed that day: for saul had
adjured the people, saying, cursed be the man that eateth any food
until evening, that i may be avenged on mine enemies. so none of the
people tasted any food.

14:25 and all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey
upon the ground.

14:26 and when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey
dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared
the oath.

14:27 but jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with
the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his
hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth;
and his eyes were enlightened.

14:28 then answered one of the people, and said, thy father straitly
charged the people with an oath, saying, cursed be the man that eateth
any food this day. and the people were faint.

14:29 then said jonathan, my father hath troubled the land: see, i
pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because i tasted a
little of this honey.

14:30 how much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of
the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been
now a much greater slaughter among the philistines?  14:31 and they
smote the philistines that day from michmash to aijalon: and the
people were very faint.

14:32 and the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen,
and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them
with the blood.

14:33 then they told saul, saying, behold, the people sin against the
lord, in that they eat with the blood. and he said, ye have
transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.

14:34 and saul said, disperse yourselves among the people, and say
unto them, bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep,
and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the lord in eating
with the blood.

and all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and
slew them there.

14:35 and saul built an altar unto the lord: the same was the first
altar that he built unto the lord.

14:36 and saul said, let us go down after the philistines by night,
and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
them. and they said, do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. then said
the priest, let us draw near hither unto god.

14:37 and saul asked counsel of god, shall i go down after the
philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of israel? but he
answered him not that day.

14:38 and saul said, draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.

14:39 for, as the lord liveth, which saveth israel, though it be in
jonathan my son, he shall surely die. but there was not a man among
all the people that answered him.

14:40 then said he unto all israel, be ye on one side, and i and
jonathan my son will be on the other side. and the people said unto
saul, do what seemeth good unto thee.

14:41 therefore saul said unto the lord god of israel, give a perfect
lot.

and saul and jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.

14:42 and saul said, cast lots between me and jonathan my son. and
jonathan was taken.

14:43 then saul said to jonathan, tell me what thou hast done. and
jonathan told him, and said, i did but taste a little honey with the
end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, i must die.

14:44 and saul answered, god do so and more also: for thou shalt
surely die, jonathan.

14:45 and the people said unto saul, shall jonathan die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in israel? god forbid: as the lord
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for
he hath wrought with god this day. so the people rescued jonathan,
that he died not.

14:46 then saul went up from following the philistines: and the
philistines went to their own place.

14:47 so saul took the kingdom over israel, and fought against all his
enemies on every side, against moab, and against the children of
ammon, and against edom, and against the kings of zobah, and against
the philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.

14:48 and he gathered an host, and smote the amalekites, and delivered
israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.

14:49 now the sons of saul were jonathan, and ishui, and melchishua:
and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the
firstborn merab, and the name of the younger michal: 14:50 and the
name of saul's wife was ahinoam, the daughter of ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of his host was abner, the son of ner, saul's uncle.

14:51 and kish was the father of saul; and ner the father of abner was
the son of abiel.

14:52 and there was sore war against the philistines all the days of
saul: and when saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took
him unto him.

15:1 samuel also said unto saul, the lord sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the lord.

15:2 thus saith the lord of hosts, i remember that which amalek did to
israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
egypt.

15:3 now go and smite amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass.

15:4 and saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in
telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of judah.

15:5 and saul came to a city of amalek, and laid wait in the valley.

15:6 and saul said unto the kenites, go, depart, get you down from
among the amalekites, lest i destroy you with them: for ye shewed
kindness to all the children of israel, when they came up out of
egypt. so the kenites departed from among the amalekites.

15:7 and saul smote the amalekites from havilah until thou comest to
shur, that is over against egypt.

15:8 and he took agag the king of the amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

15:9 but saul and the people spared agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

15:10 then came the word of the lord unto samuel, saying, 15:11 it
repenteth me that i have set up saul to be king: for he is turned back
from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. and it
grieved samuel; and he cried unto the lord all night.

15:12 and when samuel rose early to meet saul in the morning, it was
told samuel, saying, saul came to carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to gilgal.

15:13 and samuel came to saul: and saul said unto him, blessed be thou
of the lord: i have performed the commandment of the lord.

15:14 and samuel said, what meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which i hear?  15:15 and saul
said, they have brought them from the amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
lord thy god; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.

15:16 then samuel said unto saul, stay, and i will tell thee what the
lord hath said to me this night. and he said unto him, say on.

15:17 and samuel said, when thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of israel, and the lord anointed
thee king over israel?  15:18 and the lord sent thee on a journey, and
said, go and utterly destroy the sinners the amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed.

15:19 wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the lord, but
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the lord?
15:20 and saul said unto samuel, yea, i have obeyed the voice of the
lord, and have gone the way which the lord sent me, and have brought
agag the king of amalek, and have utterly destroyed the amalekites.

15:21 but the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the lord thy god in gilgal.

15:22 and samuel said, hath the lord as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the lord? behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.

15:23 for rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. because thou hast rejected the word of the
lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

15:24 and saul said unto samuel, i have sinned: for i have
transgressed the commandment of the lord, and thy words: because i
feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

15:25 now therefore, i pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord.

15:26 and samuel said unto saul, i will not return with thee: for thou
hast rejected the word of the lord, and the lord hath rejected thee
from being king over israel.

15:27 and as samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent.

15:28 and samuel said unto him, the lord hath rent the kingdom of
israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou.

15:29 and also the strength of israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent.

15:30 then he said, i have sinned: yet honour me now, i pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before israel, and turn again with
me, that i may worship the lord thy god.

15:31 so samuel turned again after saul; and saul worshipped the lord.

15:32 then said samuel, bring ye hither to me agag the king of the
amalekites. and agag came unto him delicately. and agag said, surely
the bitterness of death is past.

15:33 and samuel said, as the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. and samuel hewed agag in
pieces before the lord in gilgal.

15:34 then samuel went to ramah; and saul went up to his house to
gibeah of saul.

15:35 and samuel came no more to see saul until the day of his death:
nevertheless samuel mourned for saul: and the lord repented that he
had made saul king over israel.

16:1 and the lord said unto samuel, how long wilt thou mourn for saul,
seeing i have rejected him from reigning over israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, i will send thee to jesse the bethlehemite: for i
have provided me a king among his sons.

16:2 and samuel said, how can i go? if saul hear it, he will kill me.
and the lord said, take an heifer with thee, and say, i am come to
sacrifice to the lord.

16:3 and call jesse to the sacrifice, and i will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom i name unto thee.

16:4 and samuel did that which the lord spake, and came to bethlehem.
and the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, comest
thou peaceably?  16:5 and he said, peaceably: i am come to sacrifice
unto the lord: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.
and he sanctified jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice.

16:6 and it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on
eliab, and said, surely the lord's anointed is before him.

16:7 but the lord said unto samuel, look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature; because i have refused him: for the lord
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
the lord looketh on the heart.

16:8 then jesse called abinadab, and made him pass before samuel. and
he said, neither hath the lord chosen this.

16:9 then jesse made shammah to pass by. and he said, neither hath the
lord chosen this.

16:10 again, jesse made seven of his sons to pass before samuel. and
samuel said unto jesse, the lord hath not chosen these.

16:11 and samuel said unto jesse, are here all thy children? and he
said, there remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. and samuel said unto jesse, send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither.

16:12 and he sent, and brought him in. now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. and the lord said,
arise, anoint him: for this is he.

16:13 then samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the spirit of the lord came upon david from that
day forward. so samuel rose up, and went to ramah.

16:14 but the spirit of the lord departed from saul, and an evil
spirit from the lord troubled him.

16:15 and saul's servants said unto him, behold now, an evil spirit
from god troubleth thee.

16:16 let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from god is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.

16:17 and saul said unto his servants, provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me.

16:18 then answered one of the servants, and said, behold, i have seen
a son of jesse the bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the lord is with him.

16:19 wherefore saul sent messengers unto jesse, and said, send me
david thy son, which is with the sheep.

16:20 and jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by david his son unto saul.

16:21 and david came to saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer.

16:22 and saul sent to jesse, saying, let david, i pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.

16:23 and it came to pass, when the evil spirit from god was upon
saul, that david took an harp, and played with his hand: so saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

17:1 now the philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at shochoh, which belongeth to judah, and
pitched between shochoh and azekah, in ephesdammim.

17:2 and saul and the men of israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of elah, and set the battle in array against the
philistines.

17:3 and the philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley
between them.

17:4 and there went out a champion out of the camp of the philistines,
named goliath, of gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.

17:5 and he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed
with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels of brass.

17:6 and he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders.

17:7 and the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his
spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a
shield went before him.

17:8 and he stood and cried unto the armies of israel, and said unto
them, why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not i a
philistine, and ye servants to saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me.

17:9 if he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if i prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us.

17:10 and the philistine said, i defy the armies of israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together.

17:11 when saul and all israel heard those words of the philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

17:12 now david was the son of that ephrathite of bethlehemjudah,
whose name was jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of saul.

17:13 and the three eldest sons of jesse went and followed saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
eliab the firstborn, and next unto him abinadab, and the third
shammah.

17:14 and david was the youngest: and the three eldest followed saul.

17:15 but david went and returned from saul to feed his father's sheep
at bethlehem.

17:16 and the philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days.

17:17 and jesse said unto david his son, take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 and carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.

17:19 now saul, and they, and all the men of israel, were in the
valley of elah, fighting with the philistines.

17:20 and david rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as jesse had commanded him; and he came
to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle.

17:21 for israel and the philistines had put the battle in array, army
against army.

17:22 and david left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.

17:23 and as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion,
the philistine of gath, goliath by name, out of the armies of the
philistines, and spake according to the same words: and david heard
them.

17:24 and all the men of israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid.

17:25 and the men of israel said, have ye seen this man that is come
up?  surely to defy israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in
israel.

17:26 and david spake to the men that stood by him, saying, what shall
be done to the man that killeth this philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from israel? for who is this uncircumcised philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living god?  17:27 and the people
answered him after this manner, saying, so shall it be done to the man
that killeth him.

17:28 and eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and eliab's anger was kindled against david, and he said, why camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? i know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.

17:29 and david said, what have i now done? is there not a cause?
17:30 and he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.

17:31 and when the words were heard which david spake, they rehearsed
them before saul: and he sent for him.

17:32 and david said to saul, let no man's heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this philistine.

17:33 and saul said to david, thou art not able to go against this
philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth.

17:34 and david said unto saul, thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 and i went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, i caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him.

17:36 thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living god.

17:37 david said moreover, the lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this philistine. and saul said unto david, go, and the
lord be with thee.

17:38 and saul armed david with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.

17:39 and david girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. and david said unto saul, i cannot go
with these; for i have not proved them. and david put them off him.

17:40 and he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the philistine.

17:41 and the philistine came on and drew near unto david; and the man
that bare the shield went before him.

17:42 and when the philistine looked about, and saw david, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance.

17:43 and the philistine said unto david, am i a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? and the philistine cursed david by his gods.

17:44 and the philistine said to david, come to me, and i will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.

17:45 then said david to the philistine, thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but i come to thee in the
name of the lord of hosts, the god of the armies of israel, whom thou
hast defied.

17:46 this day will the lord deliver thee into mine hand; and i will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and i will give the
carcases of the host of the philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a god in israel.

17:47 and all this assembly shall know that the lord saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the lord's, and he will give you
into our hands.

17:48 and it came to pass, when the philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet david, that david hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the philistine.

17:49 and david put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.

17:50 so david prevailed over the philistine with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
in the hand of david.

17:51 therefore david ran, and stood upon the philistine, and took his
sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. and when the philistines saw their champion
was dead, they fled.

17:52 and the men of israel and of judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of ekron.

and the wounded of the philistines fell down by the way to shaaraim,
even unto gath, and unto ekron.

17:53 and the children of israel returned from chasing after the
philistines, and they spoiled their tents.

17:54 and david took the head of the philistine, and brought it to
jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.

17:55 and when saul saw david go forth against the philistine, he said
unto abner, the captain of the host, abner, whose son is this youth?
and abner said, as thy soul liveth, o king, i cannot tell.

17:56 and the king said, enquire thou whose son the stripling is.

17:57 and as david returned from the slaughter of the philistine,
abner took him, and brought him before saul with the head of the
philistine in his hand.

17:58 and saul said to him, whose son art thou, thou young man? and
david answered, i am the son of thy servant jesse the bethlehemite.

18:1 and it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto
saul, that the soul of jonathan was knit with the soul of david, and
jonathan loved him as his own soul.

18:2 and saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
his father's house.

18:3 then jonathan and david made a covenant, because he loved him as
his own soul.

18:4 and jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to david, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle.

18:5 and david went out whithersoever saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
saul's servants.

18:6 and it came to pass as they came, when david was returned from
the slaughter of the philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of israel, singing and dancing, to meet king saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instruments of musick.

18:7 and the women answered one another as they played, and said, saul
hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands.

18:8 and saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, they have ascribed unto david ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?
18:9 and saul eyed david from that day and forward.

18:10 and it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from god
came upon saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and david
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
saul's hand.

18:11 and saul cast the javelin; for he said, i will smite david even
to the wall with it. and david avoided out of his presence twice.

18:12 and saul was afraid of david, because the lord was with him, and
was departed from saul.

18:13 therefore saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.

18:14 and david behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the lord
was with him.

18:15 wherefore when saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he
was afraid of him.

18:16 but all israel and judah loved david, because he went out and
came in before them.

18:17 and saul said to david, behold my elder daughter merab, her will
i give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the lord's
battles.

for saul said, let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
philistines be upon him.

18:18 and david said unto saul, who am i? and what is my life, or my
father's family in israel, that i should be son in law to the king?
18:19 but it came to pass at the time when merab saul's daughter
should have been given to david, that she was given unto adriel the
meholathite to wife.

18:20 and michal saul's daughter loved david: and they told saul, and
the thing pleased him.

18:21 and saul said, i will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the philistines may be against him.
wherefore saul said to david, thou shalt this day be my son in law in
the one of the twain.

18:22 and saul commanded his servants, saying, commune with david
secretly, and say, behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law.

18:23 and saul's servants spake those words in the ears of david. and
david said, seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law,
seeing that i am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?  18:24 and the
servants of saul told him, saying, on this manner spake david.

18:25 and saul said, thus shall ye say to david, the king desireth not
any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the philistines, to be avenged
of the king's enemies. but saul thought to make david fall by the hand
of the philistines.

18:26 and when his servants told david these words, it pleased david
well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired.

18:27 wherefore david arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
philistines two hundred men; and david brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
son in law. and saul gave him michal his daughter to wife.

18:28 and saul saw and knew that the lord was with david, and that
michal saul's daughter loved him.

18:29 and saul was yet the more afraid of david; and saul became
david's enemy continually.

18:30 then the princes of the philistines went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that david behaved himself more wisely
than all the servants of saul; so that his name was much set by.

19:1 and saul spake to jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill david.

19:2 but jonathan saul's son delighted much in david: and jonathan
told david, saying, saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, i pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 and i will go out and
stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and i will commune
with my father of thee; and what i see, that i will tell thee.

19:4 and jonathan spake good of david unto saul his father, and said
unto him, let not the king sin against his servant, against david;
because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have
been to thee-ward very good: 19:5 for he did put his life in his hand,
and slew the philistine, and the lord wrought a great salvation for
all israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt
thou sin against innocent blood, to slay david without a cause?  19:6
and saul hearkened unto the voice of jonathan: and saul sware, as the
lord liveth, he shall not be slain.

19:7 and jonathan called david, and jonathan shewed him all those
things.

and jonathan brought david to saul, and he was in his presence, as in
times past.

19:8 and there was war again: and david went out, and fought with the
philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him.

19:9 and the evil spirit from the lord was upon saul, as he sat in his
house with his javelin in his hand: and david played with his hand.

19:10 and saul sought to smite david even to the wall with the
javelin: but he slipped away out of saul's presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and david fled, and escaped that night.

19:11 saul also sent messengers unto david's house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and michal david's wife told him, saying,
if thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.

19:12 so michal let david down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped.

19:13 and michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.

19:14 and when saul sent messengers to take david, she said, he is
sick.

19:15 and saul sent the messengers again to see david, saying, bring
him up to me in the bed, that i may slay him.

19:16 and when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster.

19:17 and saul said unto michal, why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? and michal answered saul, he
said unto me, let me go; why should i kill thee?  19:18 so david fled,
and escaped, and came to samuel to ramah, and told him all that saul
had done to him. and he and samuel went and dwelt in naioth.

19:19 and it was told saul, saying, behold, david is at naioth in
ramah.

19:20 and saul sent messengers to take david: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and samuel standing as appointed
over them, the spirit of god was upon the messengers of saul, and they
also prophesied.

19:21 and when it was told saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. and saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also.

19:22 then went he also to ramah, and came to a great well that is in
sechu: and he asked and said, where are samuel and david? and one
said, behold, they be at naioth in ramah.

19:23 and he went thither to naioth in ramah: and the spirit of god
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
naioth in ramah.

19:24 and he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. wherefore they say, is saul also among the prophets?  20:1 and
david fled from naioth in ramah, and came and said before jonathan,
what have i done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life?  20:2 and he said unto him, god
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so.

20:3 and david sware moreover, and said, thy father certainly knoweth
that i have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, let not jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the lord liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.

20:4 then said jonathan unto david, whatsoever thy soul desireth, i
will even do it for thee.

20:5 and david said unto jonathan, behold, to morrow is the new moon,
and i should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go,
that i may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.

20:6 if thy father at all miss me, then say, david earnestly asked
leave of me that he might run to bethlehem his city: for there is a
yearly sacrifice there for all the family.

20:7 if he say thus, it is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if
he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.

20:8 therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast
brought thy servant into a covenant of the lord with thee:
notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thy father?  20:9 and jonathan said, far be
it from thee: for if i knew certainly that evil were determined by my
father to come upon thee, then would not i tell it thee?  20:10 then
said david to jonathan, who shall tell me? or what if thy father
answer thee roughly?  20:11 and jonathan said unto david, come, and
let us go out into the field. and they went out both of them into the
field.

20:12 and jonathan said unto david, o lord god of israel, when i have
sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward david, and i then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 the lord do so and much more to jonathan: but
if it please my father to do thee evil, then i will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the lord be with
thee, as he hath been with my father.

20:14 and thou shalt not only while yet i live shew me the kindness of
the lord, that i die not: 20:15 but also thou shalt not cut off thy
kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the lord hath cut off
the enemies of david every one from the face of the earth.

20:16 so jonathan made a covenant with the house of david, saying, let
the lord even require it at the hand of david's enemies.

20:17 and jonathan caused david to swear again, because he loved him:
for he loved him as he loved his own soul.

20:18 then jonathan said to david, to morrow is the new moon: and thou
shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.

20:19 and when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down
quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone ezel.

20:20 and i will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though i
shot at a mark.

20:21 and, behold, i will send a lad, saying, go, find out the arrows.
if i expressly say unto the lad, behold, the arrows are on this side
of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no
hurt; as the lord liveth.

20:22 but if i say thus unto the young man, behold, the arrows are
beyond thee; go thy way: for the lord hath sent thee away.

20:23 and as touching the matter which thou and i have spoken of,
behold, the lord be between thee and me for ever.

20:24 so david hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat.

20:25 and the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and jonathan arose, and abner sat by saul's side,
and david's place was empty.

20:26 nevertheless saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.

20:27 and it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of
the month, that david's place was empty: and saul said unto jonathan
his son, wherefore cometh not the son of jesse to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day?  20:28 and jonathan answered saul, david
earnestly asked leave of me to go to bethlehem: 20:29 and he said, let
me go, i pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and
my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if i have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, i pray thee, and see my
brethren. therefore he cometh not unto the king's table.

20:30 then saul's anger was kindled against jonathan, and he said unto
him, thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not i know that
thou hast chosen the son of jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
confusion of thy mother's nakedness?  20:31 for as long as the son of
jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die.

20:32 and jonathan answered saul his father, and said unto him,
wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?  20:33 and saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: whereby jonathan knew that it was
determined of his father to slay david.

20:34 so jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for david,
because his father had done him shame.

20:35 and it came to pass in the morning, that jonathan went out into
the field at the time appointed with david, and a little lad with him.

20:36 and he said unto his lad, run, find out now the arrows which i
shoot. and as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

20:37 and when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which
jonathan had shot, jonathan cried after the lad, and said, is not the
arrow beyond thee?  20:38 and jonathan cried after the lad, make
speed, haste, stay not. and jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and
came to his master.

20:39 but the lad knew not any thing: only jonathan and david knew the
matter.

20:40 and jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him,
go, carry them to the city.

20:41 and as soon as the lad was gone, david arose out of a place
toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed
himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with
another, until david exceeded.

20:42 and jonathan said to david, go in peace, forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the lord, saying, the lord be between
me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. and he arose
and departed: and jonathan went into the city.

21:1 then came david to nob to ahimelech the priest: and ahimelech was
afraid at the meeting of david, and said unto him, why art thou alone,
and no man with thee?  21:2 and david said unto ahimelech the priest,
the king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, let no
man know any thing of the business whereabout i send thee, and what i
have commanded thee: and i have appointed my servants to such and such
a place.

21:3 now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of
bread in mine hand, or what there is present.

21:4 and the priest answered david, and said, there is no common bread
under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have
kept themselves at least from women.

21:5 and david answered the priest, and said unto him, of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, since i came out,
and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.

21:6 so the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread
there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the lord, to put
hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

21:7 now a certain man of the servants of saul was there that day,
detained before the lord; and his name was doeg, an edomite, the
chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to saul.

21:8 and david said unto ahimelech, and is there not here under thine
hand spear or sword? for i have neither brought my sword nor my
weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.

21:9 and the priest said, the sword of goliath the philistine, whom
thou slewest in the valley of elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a
cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is
no other save that here. and david said, there is none like that; give
it me.

21:10 and david arose and fled that day for fear of saul, and went to
achish the king of gath.

21:11 and the servants of achish said unto him, is not this david the
king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances,
saying, saul hath slain his thousands, and david his ten thousands?
21:12 and david laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid
of achish the king of gath.

21:13 and he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself
mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let
his spittle fall down upon his beard.

21:14 then said achish unto his servants, lo, ye see the man is mad:
wherefore then have ye brought him to me?  21:15 have i need of mad
men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my
presence? shall this fellow come into my house?  22:1 david therefore
departed thence, and escaped to the cave adullam: and when his
brethren and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither
to him.

22:2 and every one that was in distress, and every one that was in
debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto
him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about
four hundred men.

22:3 and david went thence to mizpeh of moab: and he said unto the
king of moab, let my father and my mother, i pray thee, come forth,
and be with you, till i know what god will do for me.

22:4 and he brought them before the king of moab: and they dwelt with
him all the while that david was in the hold.

22:5 and the prophet gad said unto david, abide not in the hold;
depart, and get thee into the land of judah. then david departed, and
came into the forest of hareth.

22:6 when saul heard that david was discovered, and the men that were
with him, (now saul abode in gibeah under a tree in ramah, having his
spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;) 22:7
then saul said unto his servants that stood about him, hear now, ye
benjamites; will the son of jesse give every one of you fields and
vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds; 22:8 that all of you have conspired against me, and there is
none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of
jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto
me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait,
as at this day?  22:9 then answered doeg the edomite, which was set
over the servants of saul, and said, i saw the son of jesse coming to
nob, to ahimelech the son of ahitub.

22:10 and he enquired of the lord for him, and gave him victuals, and
gave him the sword of goliath the philistine.

22:11 then the king sent to call ahimelech the priest, the son of
ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests that were in nob: and
they came all of them to the king.

22:12 and saul said, hear now, thou son of ahitub. and he answered,
here i am, my lord.

22:13 and saul said unto him, why have ye conspired against me, thou
and the son of jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword,
and hast enquired of god for him, that he should rise against me, to
lie in wait, as at this day?  22:14 then ahimelech answered the king,
and said, and who is so faithful among all thy servants as david,
which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is
honourable in thine house?  22:15 did i then begin to enquire of god
for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his
servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew
nothing of all this, less or more.

22:16 and the king said, thou shalt surely die, ahimelech, thou, and
all thy father's house.

22:17 and the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, turn,
and slay the priests of the lord: because their hand also is with
david, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me.
but the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall
upon the priests of the lord.

22:18 and the king said to doeg, turn thou, and fall upon the priests.
and doeg the edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on
that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.

22:19 and nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and
asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

22:20 and one of the sons of ahimelech the son of ahitub, named
abiathar, escaped, and fled after david.

22:21 and abiathar shewed david that saul had slain the lord's
priests.

22:22 and david said unto abiathar, i knew it that day, when doeg the
edomite was there, that he would surely tell saul: i have occasioned
the death of all the persons of thy father's house.

22:23 abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life
seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.

23:1 then they told david, saying, behold, the philistines fight
against keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.

23:2 therefore david enquired of the lord, saying, shall i go and
smite these philistines? and the lord said unto david, go, and smite
the philistines, and save keilah.

23:3 and david's men said unto him, behold, we be afraid here in
judah: how much more then if we come to keilah against the armies of
the philistines?  23:4 then david enquired of the lord yet again. and
the lord answered him and said, arise, go down to keilah; for i will
deliver the philistines into thine hand.

23:5 so david and his men went to keilah, and fought with the
philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a
great slaughter. so david saved the inhabitants of keilah.

23:6 and it came to pass, when abiathar the son of ahimelech fled to
david to keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.

23:7 and it was told saul that david was come to keilah. and saul
said, god hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by
entering into a town that hath gates and bars.

23:8 and saul called all the people together to war, to go down to
keilah, to besiege david and his men.

23:9 and david knew that saul secretly practised mischief against him;
and he said to abiathar the priest, bring hither the ephod.

23:10 then said david, o lord god of israel, thy servant hath
certainly heard that saul seeketh to come to keilah, to destroy the
city for my sake.

23:11 will the men of keilah deliver me up into his hand? will saul
come down, as thy servant hath heard? o lord god of israel, i beseech
thee, tell thy servant. and the lord said, he will come down.

23:12 then said david, will the men of keilah deliver me and my men
into the hand of saul? and the lord said, they will deliver thee up.

23:13 then david and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and
departed out of keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. and it
was told saul that david was escaped from keilah; and he forbare to go
forth.

23:14 and david abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained
in a mountain in the wilderness of ziph. and saul sought him every
day, but god delivered him not into his hand.

23:15 and david saw that saul was come out to seek his life: and david
was in the wilderness of ziph in a wood.

23:16 and jonathan saul's son arose, and went to david into the wood,
and strengthened his hand in god.

23:17 and he said unto him, fear not: for the hand of saul my father
shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over israel, and i shall
be next unto thee; and that also saul my father knoweth.

23:18 and they two made a covenant before the lord: and david abode in
the wood, and jonathan went to his house.

23:19 then came up the ziphites to saul to gibeah, saying, doth not
david hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of
hachilah, which is on the south of jeshimon?  23:20 now therefore, o
king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down;
and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand.

23:21 and saul said, blessed be ye of the lord; for ye have compassion
on me.

23:22 go, i pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where
his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he
dealeth very subtilly.

23:23 see therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places
where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty,
and i will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the
land, that i will search him out throughout all the thousands of
judah.

23:24 and they arose, and went to ziph before saul: but david and his
men were in the wilderness of maon, in the plain on the south of
jeshimon.

23:25 saul also and his men went to seek him. and they told david;
wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of
maon. and when saul heard that, he pursued after david in the
wilderness of maon.

23:26 and saul went on this side of the mountain, and david and his
men on that side of the mountain: and david made haste to get away for
fear of saul; for saul and his men compassed david and his men round
about to take them.

23:27 but there came a messenger unto saul, saying, haste thee, and
come; for the philistines have invaded the land.

23:28 wherefore saul returned from pursuing after david, and went
against the philistines: therefore they called that place
selahammahlekoth.

23:29 and david went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at
engedi.

24:1 and it came to pass, when saul was returned from following the
philistines, that it was told him, saying, behold, david is in the
wilderness of engedi.

24:2 then saul took three thousand chosen men out of all israel, and
went to seek david and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.

24:3 and he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and
saul went in to cover his feet: and david and his men remained in the
sides of the cave.

24:4 and the men of david said unto him, behold the day of which the
lord said unto thee, behold, i will deliver thine enemy into thine
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. then
david arose, and cut off the skirt of saul's robe privily.

24:5 and it came to pass afterward, that david's heart smote him,
because he had cut off saul's skirt.

24:6 and he said unto his men, the lord forbid that i should do this
thing unto my master, the lord's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the lord.

24:7 so david stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them
not to rise against saul. but saul rose up out of the cave, and went
on his way.

24:8 david also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried
after saul, saying, my lord the king. and when saul looked behind him,
david stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.

24:9 and david said to saul, wherefore hearest thou men's words,
saying, behold, david seeketh thy hurt?  24:10 behold, this day thine
eyes have seen how that the lord had delivered thee to day into mine
hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared
thee; and i said, i will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for
he is the lord's anointed.

24:11 moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my
hand: for in that i cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee
not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in
mine hand, and i have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my
soul to take it.

24:12 the lord judge between me and thee, and the lord avenge me of
thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:13 as saith the proverb of the ancients, wickedness proceedeth from
the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.

24:14 after whom is the king of israel come out? after whom dost thou
pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.

24:15 the lord therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and
see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.

24:16 and it came to pass, when david had made an end of speaking
these words unto saul, that saul said, is this thy voice, my son
david? and saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

24:17 and he said to david, thou art more righteous than i: for thou
hast rewarded me good, whereas i have rewarded thee evil.

24:18 and thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not.

24:19 for if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away?
wherefore the lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me
this day.

24:20 and now, behold, i know well that thou shalt surely be king, and
that the kingdom of israel shall be established in thine hand.

24:21 swear now therefore unto me by the lord, that thou wilt not cut
off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my
father's house.

24:22 and david sware unto saul. and saul went home; but david and his
men gat them up unto the hold.

25:1 and samuel died; and all the israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at ramah. and david
arose, and went down to the wilderness of paran.

25:2 and there was a man in maon, whose possessions were in carmel;
and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a
thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in carmel.

25:3 now the name of the man was nabal; and the name of his wife
abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he
was of the house of caleb.

25:4 and david heard in the wilderness that nabal did shear his sheep.

25:5 and david sent out ten young men, and david said unto the young
men, get you up to carmel, and go to nabal, and greet him in my name:
25:6 and thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, peace be
both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that
thou hast.

25:7 and now i have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds
which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing
unto them, all the while they were in carmel.

25:8 ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. wherefore let the
young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give,
i pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to
thy son david.

25:9 and when david's young men came, they spake to nabal according to
all those words in the name of david, and ceased.

25:10 and nabal answered david's servants, and said, who is david? and
who is the son of jesse? there be many servants now a days that break
away every man from his master.

25:11 shall i then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that i
have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom i know not
whence they be?  25:12 so david's young men turned their way, and went
again, and came and told him all those sayings.

25:13 and david said unto his men, gird ye on every man his sword. and
they girded on every man his sword; and david also girded on his
sword: and there went up after david about four hundred men; and two
hundred abode by the stuff.

25:14 but one of the young men told abigail, nabal's wife, saying,
behold, david sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our
master; and he railed on them.

25:15 but the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt,
neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them,
when we were in the fields: 25:16 they were a wall unto us both by
night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.

25:17 now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is
determined against our master, and against all his household: for he
is such a son of belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

25:18 then abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two
bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred
cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.

25:19 and she said unto her servants, go on before me; behold, i come
after you. but she told not her husband nabal.

25:20 and it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the
covert on the hill, and, behold, david and his men came down against
her; and she met them.

25:21 now david had said, surely in vain have i kept all that this
fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that
pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.

25:22 so and more also do god unto the enemies of david, if i leave of
all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against
the wall.

25:23 and when abigail saw david, she hasted, and lighted off the ass,
and fell before david on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
25:24 and fell at his feet, and said, upon me, my lord, upon me let
this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, i pray thee, speak in thine
audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.

25:25 let not my lord, i pray thee, regard this man of belial, even
nabal: for as his name is, so is he; nabal is his name, and folly is
with him: but i thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom
thou didst send.

25:26 now therefore, my lord, as the lord liveth, and as thy soul
liveth, seeing the lord hath withholden thee from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine
enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as nabal.

25:27 and now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my
lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.

25:28 i pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the
lord will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord
fighteth the battles of the lord, and evil hath not been found in thee
all thy days.

25:29 yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the
soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the lord thy
god; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out
of the middle of a sling.

25:30 and it shall come to pass, when the lord shall have done to my
lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee,
and shall have appointed thee ruler over israel; 25:31 that this shall
be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that
thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself:
but when the lord shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember
thine handmaid.

25:32 and david said to abigail, blessed be the lord god of israel,
which sent thee this day to meet me: 25:33 and blessed be thy advice,
and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.

25:34 for in very deed, as the lord god of israel liveth, which hath
kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to
meet me, surely there had not been left unto nabal by the morning
light any that pisseth against the wall.

25:35 so david received of her hand that which she had brought him,
and said unto her, go up in peace to thine house; see, i have
hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.

25:36 and abigail came to nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his
house, like the feast of a king; and nabal's heart was merry within
him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or
more, until the morning light.

25:37 but it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out
of nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died
within him, and he became as a stone.

25:38 and it came to pass about ten days after, that the lord smote
nabal, that he died.

25:39 and when david heard that nabal was dead, he said, blessed be
the lord, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of
nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the lord hath returned
the wickedness of nabal upon his own head. and david sent and communed
with abigail, to take her to him to wife.

25:40 and when the servants of david were come to abigail to carmel,
they spake unto her, saying, david sent us unto thee, to take thee to
him to wife.

25:41 and she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and
said, behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my lord.

25:42 and abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an ass, with five
damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers
of david, and became his wife.

25:43 david also took ahinoam of jezreel; and they were also both of
them his wives.

25:44 but saul had given michal his daughter, david's wife, to phalti
the son of laish, which was of gallim.

26:1 and the ziphites came unto saul to gibeah, saying, doth not david
hide himself in the hill of hachilah, which is before jeshimon?  26:2
then saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of ziph, having three
thousand chosen men of israel with him, to seek david in the
wilderness of ziph.

26:3 and saul pitched in the hill of hachilah, which is before
jeshimon, by the way. but david abode in the wilderness, and he saw
that saul came after him into the wilderness.

26:4 david therefore sent out spies, and understood that saul was come
in very deed.

26:5 and david arose, and came to the place where saul had pitched:
and david beheld the place where saul lay, and abner the son of ner,
the captain of his host: and saul lay in the trench, and the people
pitched round about him.

26:6 then answered david and said to ahimelech the hittite, and to
abishai the son of zeruiah, brother to joab, saying, who will go down
with me to saul to the camp? and abishai said, i will go down with
thee.

26:7 so david and abishai came to the people by night: and, behold,
saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground
at his bolster: but abner and the people lay round about him.

26:8 then said abishai to david, god hath delivered thine enemy into
thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, i pray thee, with
the spear even to the earth at once, and i will not smite him the
second time.

26:9 and david said to abishai, destroy him not: for who can stretch
forth his hand against the lord's anointed, and be guiltless?  26:10
david said furthermore, as the lord liveth, the lord shall smite him;
or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and
perish.

26:11 the lord forbid that i should stretch forth mine hand against
the lord's anointed: but, i pray thee, take thou now the spear that is
at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.

26:12 so david took the spear and the cruse of water from saul's
bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it,
neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from
the lord was fallen upon them.

26:13 then david went over to the other side, and stood on the top of
an hill afar off; a great space being between them: 26:14 and david
cried to the people, and to abner the son of ner, saying, answerest
thou not, abner? then abner answered and said, who art thou that
criest to the king?  26:15 and david said to abner, art not thou a
valiant man? and who is like to thee in israel? wherefore then hast
thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in
to destroy the king thy lord.

26:16 this thing is not good that thou hast done. as the lord liveth,
ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the lord's
anointed.

and now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was
at his bolster.

26:17 and saul knew david's voice, and said, is this thy voice, my son
david? and david said, it is my voice, my lord, o king.

26:18 and he said, wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his
servant?  for what have i done? or what evil is in mine hand?  26:19
now therefore, i pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his
servant. if the lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept
an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before
the lord; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the
inheritance of the lord, saying, go, serve other gods.

26:20 now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the
face of the lord: for the king of israel is come out to seek a flea,
as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.

26:21 then said saul, i have sinned: return, my son david: for i will
no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this
day: behold, i have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.

26:22 and david answered and said, behold the king's spear! and let
one of the young men come over and fetch it.

26:23 the lord render to every man his righteousness and his
faithfulness; for the lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but i
would not stretch forth mine hand against the lord's anointed.

26:24 and, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes,
so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the lord, and let him
deliver me out of all tribulation.

26:25 then saul said to david, blessed be thou, my son david: thou
shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. so david
went on his way, and saul returned to his place.

27:1 and david said in his heart, i shall now perish one day by the
hand of saul: there is nothing better for me than that i should
speedily escape into the land of the philistines; and saul shall
despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of israel: so shall i
escape out of his hand.

27:2 and david arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that
were with him unto achish, the son of maoch, king of gath.

27:3 and david dwelt with achish at gath, he and his men, every man
with his household, even david with his two wives, ahinoam the
jezreelitess, and abigail the carmelitess, nabal's wife.

27:4 and it was told saul that david was fled to gath: and he sought
no more again for him.

27:5 and david said unto achish, if i have now found grace in thine
eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that i may
dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with
thee?  27:6 then achish gave him ziklag that day: wherefore ziklag
pertaineth unto the kings of judah unto this day.

27:7 and the time that david dwelt in the country of the philistines
was a full year and four months.

27:8 and david and his men went up, and invaded the geshurites, and
the gezrites, and the amalekites: for those nations were of old the
inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to shur, even unto the land of
egypt.

27:9 and david smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive,
and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels,
and the apparel, and returned, and came to achish.

27:10 and achish said, whither have ye made a road to day? and david
said, against the south of judah, and against the south of the
jerahmeelites, and against the south of the kenites.

27:11 and david saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to
gath, saying, lest they should tell on us, saying, so did david, and
so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the
philistines.

27:12 and achish believed david, saying, he hath made his people
israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for
ever.

28:1 and it came to pass in those days, that the philistines gathered
their armies together for warfare, to fight with israel. and achish
said unto david, know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me
to battle, thou and thy men.

28:2 and david said to achish, surely thou shalt know what thy servant
can do. and achish said to david, therefore will i make thee keeper of
mine head for ever.

28:3 now samuel was dead, and all israel had lamented him, and buried
him in ramah, even in his own city. and saul had put away those that
had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.

28:4 and the philistines gathered themselves together, and came and
pitched in shunem: and saul gathered all israel together, and they
pitched in gilboa.

28:5 and when saul saw the host of the philistines, he was afraid, and
his heart greatly trembled.

28:6 and when saul enquired of the lord, the lord answered him not,
neither by dreams, nor by urim, nor by prophets.

28:7 then said saul unto his servants, seek me a woman that hath a
familiar spirit, that i may go to her, and enquire of her. and his
servants said to him, behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar
spirit at endor.

28:8 and saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he
went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and
he said, i pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring
me him up, whom i shall name unto thee.

28:9 and the woman said unto him, behold, thou knowest what saul hath
done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the
wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my
life, to cause me to die?  28:10 and saul sware to her by the lord,
saying, as the lord liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee
for this thing.

28:11 then said the woman, whom shall i bring up unto thee? and he
said, bring me up samuel.

28:12 and when the woman saw samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and
the woman spake to saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art saul.

28:13 and the king said unto her, be not afraid: for what sawest thou?
and the woman said unto saul, i saw gods ascending out of the earth.

28:14 and he said unto her, what form is he of? and she said, an old
man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. and saul perceived
that it was samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and
bowed himself.

28:15 and samuel said to saul, why hast thou disquieted me, to bring
me up? and saul answered, i am sore distressed; for the philistines
make war against me, and god is departed from me, and answereth me no
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore i have called
thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what i shall do.

28:16 then said samuel, wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the
lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?  28:17 and the
lord hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the lord hath rent the
kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to
david: 28:18 because thou obeyedst not the voice of the lord, nor
executedst his fierce wrath upon amalek, therefore hath the lord done
this thing unto thee this day.

28:19 moreover the lord will also deliver israel with thee into the
hand of the philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with
me: the lord also shall deliver the host of israel into the hand of
the philistines.

28:20 then saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore
afraid, because of the words of samuel: and there was no strength in
him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.

28:21 and the woman came unto saul, and saw that he was sore troubled,
and said unto him, behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and i
have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which
thou spakest unto me.

28:22 now therefore, i pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of
thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat,
that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.

28:23 but he refused, and said, i will not eat. but his servants,
together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their
voice. so he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.

28:24 and the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and
killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened
bread thereof: 28:25 and she brought it before saul, and before his
servants; and they did eat. then they rose up, and went away that
night.

29:1 now the philistines gathered together all their armies to aphek:
and the israelites pitched by a fountain which is in jezreel.

29:2 and the lords of the philistines passed on by hundreds, and by
thousands: but david and his men passed on in the rereward with
achish.

29:3 then said the princes of the philistines, what do these hebrews
here?  and achish said unto the princes of the philistines, is not
this david, the servant of saul the king of israel, which hath been
with me these days, or these years, and i have found no fault in him
since he fell unto me unto this day?  29:4 and the princes of the
philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the philistines
said unto him, make this fellow return, that he may go again to his
place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us
to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith
should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the
heads of these men?  29:5 is not this david, of whom they sang one to
another in dances, saying, saul slew his thousands, and david his ten
thousands?  29:6 then achish called david, and said unto him, surely,
as the lord liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy
coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for i have not
found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day:
nevertheless the lords favour thee not.
